Beloved of My Heart
Talks given from 3/5/76 to 28/5/76
Darshan Diary
CHAPTER 1
The Other is never Responsible
3 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
[A sannyasin mother says she is having problems in her relationship: I find myself being very bitchy
and nagging sometimes. I feel I’m just asking for a fight all the time.]
Mm mm, love always brings trouble – and it has to be faced. Love cannot be always smooth, and it
is good that it is not always smooth, otherwise you would not grow.
Whenever there is a change, any sort of change, things will come into focus more clearly. When
change disturbs you, all your inner disturbances are stirred. You are both feeling disturbed and both
trying to throw the responsibility on the other. Just try to see it inside yourself. The other is never
responsible. Remember that as a mantra: The other is never responsible....
Just watch it ... just watch it. If you become wise in the moment, there will be no problem. This is
wisdom that you get later on. Everybody becomes wise when the moment is gone. Retrospective
wisdom is worthless. When you are picking on something, at that very moment become aware, and
let awareness function. Immediately you will drop it.
But when you have done everything and fought and nagged and bitched and then you become wise
and see that there was no point in it, it is too late. It is meaningless – you have done the harm. This
wisdom is just pseudo-wisdom. It gives you a feeling as if you have understood. That is a trick of
the ego. This wisdom is not going to help. When you were doing the thing, at that very moment,
simultaneously, the awareness should arise, and you should see that it is useless.
If you can see it when it is there, then you cannot do it. One can never go against one’s awareness,
and if one goes against it, that awareness is not awareness. Something else is being mistaken for
it.
2
CHAPTER 1. THE OTHER IS NEVER RESPONSIBLE
So remember, the other is never responsible for anything. It is something boiling within you. And of
course the one you love is closest to you. You cannot throw it on some stranger passing on the road,
so the closest person becomes the place where you go on throwing and pouring your nonsense.
But that has to be avoided, because love is very fragile. If you do it too much, if you overdo it, love
can disappear.
The other is never responsible. Try to make this such a permanent state of awareness in you that
whenever you start finding something wrong with the other, remember it. Catch yourself redhanded,
and drop it then and there. And ask to be forgiven.
And the second thing. Don’t think that love is eternal. It is very fragile. It is as fragile as a rose
flower. In the morning it is there – by the evening it is gone. Any small thing can destroy it. In fact
the higher a thing, the more fragile it is. It has to be protected. A rock will remain there but the flower
will be gone. If you throw a rock against the flower, the rock is not going to be hurt, but the flower
will be destroyed.
Love is very fragile and very delicate. One has to be very very careful and cautious about it. You can
do such harm that the other becomes closed, becomes defensive. That’s how one becomes closed.
If you are fighting too much he will start escaping you; he will start becoming more and more cold,
more and more closed, so he is no more vulnerable to your attack. Then you will attack him more
because you will resist that coldness. This can become a vicious circle. And that’s how lovers fall
apart by and by. They drift away from each other, and they think that the other was responsible, that
the other betrayed them.
In fact as I see it, no lover has ever betrayed anybody. It is only ignorance that kills love – nobody
betrays it. Both wanted to be together, but somehow both were ignorant. Their ignorance played
tricks upon them and became multiplied. By and by they drifted. Then they think that love is
dangerous.
Love is not dangerous. Only unawareness is dangerous.
There are many people who avoid love just to be on safe ground. There are people who don’t want
to get committed in any relationship because they know that once you are committed and you come
close, fighting starts, resistance starts, and ugly things bubble up, so what is the point? At the most
they are interested in sexual relationships, but not in intimacy. And unless a relationship is intimate
and deep, you will never know what relationship is. Just a sexual relationship is a peripheral thing,
and you will never be contented by it.
These things are natural. One has to accept them and by and by transcend them. If you feel too
much anger, move into your room, beat the pillow, cry, weep, scream, but do it alone. Why show
your ugly face to the other? What is the point? Just cathart.
A wise person moves through his unhappiness alone, and whenever he is happy, comes and shares
it with people. A fool shares his unhappiness with people, and when he is happy he sits alone.
[Another sannyasin said she too was having difficulties in her relationship. Her boyfriend felt less
and less like making love and this made her upset and frustrated, and she then became aggressive
Beloved of My Heart 3 Osho
CHAPTER 1. THE OTHER IS NEVER RESPONSIBLE
towards him. She said they were also at variance over how they used their money, as she wanted
to be thrifty so they could stay in Poona longer, while he spent money easily and seemingly with no
thought for the future.]
First thing: a moment always comes in life when one of the partners will not feel like having sex.
It happens to every couple more or less. When the other person does not want to have sex, the
other clings to it more than ever. The other starts feeling that if there is no sex, the relationship will
disappear.
The more you ask for it, the more afraid he will feel. The relationship will disappear – not because
sex has disappeared, but because you go on demanding and he feels nagged continuously and he
does not feel like making love. He can either force himself and then he will feel bad, or if he goes his
own way, he feels bad that he is making you unhappy; he feels guilty.
One thing has to be understood – that sex has nothing to do with love. At the most it is a beginning.
Love is greater than sex, higher than sex. Love can flower without sex.
[She answers: But he’ll never say he loves me.]
No, you are making him afraid, because if he says that he loves you, you are ready there asking for
sex. In your mind, love is almost synonymous with sex, that I can see. That’s why he has become
even afraid to touch and hug you. If he hugs you, touches you, you are ready.
You are making him afraid and you are not seeing the point. You are pushing him away unknowingly.
He will become afraid to even talk to you because he talks and again the situation comes up and
argument and this and that. You cannot argue about love. You cannot convince anybody about love.
If he doesn’t feel it, he doesn’t.
He loves you, otherwise he would leave you. And you love him but you have a wrong understanding
about sex. My understanding is this, that love starts growing for the first time when the hectic
feverish sex has gone, has by and by slowed down. Then love becomes more and more settled,
finer, superior. Something delicate starts happening. But you are not allowing it to happen. He is
ready to love you but you are clinging to sex. You go on pulling him down. That pulling him down
may destroy the whole relationship.
I can understand, because the feminine mind always clings to sex only when the man is not
interested. If the man is interested, the woman is completely uninterested. I see this every day. If the
man is after you, you play the game that you are uninterested. When the man is not interested, you
become afraid, and then the whole role changes. Then you start playing the game that you need it,
that without it you will go crazy; that you cannot live without it. All that is just nonsense! Nobody has
ever gone mad without it!
If you love the person, your energy will be transformed. If you don’t love the person, then drop
out. If you love the person, the energy has a chance now to transform to a higher reality. Use that
opportunity. And nagging is not going to help. It will make everything more ugly and it will do just
the opposite of what you want. Money is not important... and it may be just a trick to control.
Beloved of My Heart 4 Osho
CHAPTER 1. THE OTHER IS NEVER RESPONSIBLE
[Osho said that they could either be here for longer, both in conflict, unhappy, or stay a shorter time
more happily.]
Just see the point. It is a question of quality, not of quantity. How many days you are here is
irrelevant. You may be here for only one day, but if you are really with me and happy and celebrating, that’s enough. That will change your whole life.
And this is how things go. If you are too miserly, he will spend too much because that will become
just an act of being free. He will show you that you cannot control him. If you don’t control him, he
himself may understand that he is unnecessarily wasting money. But let him see!
Women are very money-minded; more interested in the material part of life, and they miss many
things. That’s why you don’t see great women poets, great women painters, great women saints.
They are more interested in ordinary things. Anything that has a qualitative dimension seems
meaningless to them. Money will be more meaningful than music. They miss much. They think
that they are very practical; they are not. This is the most absurd practicality there is – to lose quality
for quantity.
Tell him that whatsoever he feels like, to do, and that you can be here for as many days as possible,
but let these days be beautiful. Sometimes even a single moment can be such a transformation.
There are many people who choose quantity, who would like to live a hundred years, never thinking
whether their life has anything to live for, whether anything is coming out of their life, flowering. Just
living for a hundred years is meaningless....
[Osho recounted an incident in Emerson’s life when, at the age of sixty, he was asked his age by
one of his peers.
Emerson replied that he was three hundred and sixty; The man repeated his question, thinking
Emerson must have misheard him. Emerson said that, like the questioner, he was sixty, but he had
lived three hundred and sixty years in those sixty years. He was saying that he had lived a qualitative
life.]
It is possible to live three hundred years in three seconds, because when you move in the qualitative
dimension, the dimension of quality, intensity is the only value.
Be here for one month – but be fully here. And always remember, I am not talking philosophy. I am
very pragmatic.
Whatsoever I am saying are very practical things. Mm? Just try to see it. Good !
[Another sannyasin says: Very often when I am going to sleep, just before I become unconscious,
my body jerks and my heart seems to beat very fast, and there is a feeling of fear.]
Is there any disturbance in sleep? You feel perfectly well when you get up?
[The sannyasin answers: Yes, sleep is good.]
Beloved of My Heart 5 Osho
CHAPTER 1. THE OTHER IS NEVER RESPONSIBLE
Then don’t be worried. It has something to do with your meditations. Allow it and don’t hold it. If a
jerk comes, allow it.
It is just a change of gear inside the energy. It happens to everybody when you move from
wakefulness into sleep, but you have become aware of it, that’s all. It is a good sign, a good sign of
awareness of something very subtle. It is just like changing gears in a car.
Whenever you go from wakefulness to sleep, or from sleep to wakefulness, that change happens.
Whenever you go from dreaming to a non-dreaming sleep, again the gear changes. By and by, if
you become really perceptive and aware, you will feel that whenever a mood changes, a subtle gear
inside you changes. There is a small click – it can almost be heard.
You are angry and then anger goes. Your whole mechanism has to change because for anger
the whole mechanism goes into a different type of working. It gets ready for being angry. The
mechanism prepares either for fight or fight. When the anger goes, again the mechanism relaxes
to the normal state of affairs and the gear changes. It changes with every emotion. From waking
to sleep, one becomes aware more easily. Then you become aware of the second – moving from
sleep into waking.
It is more difficult than the first because you are asleep. You cannot feel the jerk so easily unless
you become a little aware in your sleep. Then you will feel the third gear that changes in moving
between dreams and no-dreams, and then the fourth which changes when moving from no-dream
to dream. And so on and so forth.
You will become aware that anger, love, hatred, jealousy, all have a small mechanism inside you,
and that whenever one of them functions, the body manages in a different way. An angry person is
a totally different person.
It is as if the country is at war. The whole shape of the country changes. The army becomes more
important. Democratic freedom becomes meaningless and the country goes dictatorial. Luxuries
are no more important. Life is geared for war.
When the war goes, the military subsides into the background. Things bubble up and come to the
surface – life again starts singing and enjoying. Now life is geared to peace.
The same happens in the body continuously. And that’s why people who move from one emotion
to another too much, have too much wear and tear. Their inner mechanism is almost always in bad
shape. A person who remains silently in one climate has a different harmony.
But it is good that you have become aware.
[Another sannyasin says: I feel like I’ve been ripped open with a knife. I have a sensitivity for
everything around me and my world just seems blown apart.]
Mm mm... the more one makes a world, the more one creates problems around it. Then there is
always the fear of its getting blown. So don’t make a world. One should start living without a world.
One moment is enough. Live it, and then the next moment comes. But we dream, project, and
Beloved of My Heart 6 Osho
CHAPTER 1. THE OTHER IS NEVER RESPONSIBLE
create an illusory world, then again and again it comes up against reality. Reality is not going to be
shattered by your dreams. The dreams will shatter.
So learn a lesson – don’t project worlds. They create frustrations and misery and anguish. Just live
this moment, that’s all. Then wait, and when the next moment comes we will see. One has to learn
how to live in danger and insecurity – then it never comes, because there is no world to be blown.
Otherwise the balloon is going to burst. The mind has a tendency to go on giving more and more air
to the balloon so it goes on getting bigger and bigger and bigger; until one day it bursts.
One has to come to understand that life is insecure and there is no way to make it .secure, no way
at all. If you ask for the impossible, you ask for trouble. Some people get into love and then they
start thinking of marriage and children, and they create the whole problem. If I say to them not to
get married, not to have children, they think ’Why are you saying this? We want to!’ You want to –
and then you get into trouble.
[Osho went on to say that the relationship between this sannyasin and her husband had not been
going well for some time but they had avoided facing up to that. He suggested they sit down together
and sort things out; should find out whether they still loved each other or not. If love was not there
then nothing could be solved. Once love was there everything could be solved. Otherwise, [your
husband] could solve one problem and she would create another and the basic problem would
remain untouched.]
And don’t be worried – I am here. If you don’t bring problems, what am I going to do? When you
bring problems you make me very happy (laughter).
[A sannyasin who is a theoretical physicist, says: My mind feels very slow and dull, and my thoughts
feel as if they ’re moving through treacle. It feels rather strange.]
It is strange but it is very good. Everything has to slow down, and there comes a moment when
everything stops, even time stops. Suddenly you are in an eternal now... nothing moves.
It is very strange. Even a slowing down of the process is very strange. One becomes afraid because
one has always lived in such a hurry; so many thoughts and desires and ambitions, running and
chasing this and that. It is as if somebody is mad and suddenly becomes sane. Everything will slow
down because a madman is moving fast. His mind goes on at jet speed. He is almost a whirl-wind.
But this is good. That is the whole taoist attitude about life – to slow down, to become a dullard.
[The sannyasin adds: At night I’ve been dreaming a lot, and in my dreams I’m very fast.]
Let it be so. That may just be a catharsis. You have slowed down a little in the day, so somewhere
the mind has to take revenge. Somewhere it will; it is good. Dreams will also disappear. And it may
not be exactly as you are reporting. It may just be that you have become a little alert in your sleep
so you remember more about dreams.
Everybody dreams. There are almost eight cycles of dreaming in one night. One goes on revolving
in a wheel. There is almost twenty minutes of dreaming, then a twenty-minute or forty-minute gap,
Beloved of My Heart 7 Osho
CHAPTER 1. THE OTHER IS NEVER RESPONSIBLE
and then again twenty minutes of dreaming. Many people will say in the morning that they have not
dreamt at all. They all dream. The only thing is that they are not at all alert, not even slightly alert,
and they cannot remember.
When they do remember, they remember the last dream that they had just before waking – and that
too, they never remember rightly. You remember only the tail part because that is what is there when
you wake. The whole elephant is gone, and only the tail remains. You have to go backwards if you
want to find the elephant.
Even then many things are missed and the mind starts adding things, and interpreting whatsoever
was in your dreams. You add many things because the mind is such that it cannot allow any gaps.
[Osho concluded by talking about how the different interpretations of dreams change according to
the influences in one’s life. For example, freudian patients, people undergoing freudian analysis, will
have freudian dreams, while jungian patients will have jungian dreams.
Because the mind is coloured by the different schools of thought, it interprets the dreams accordingly.
Hence, if one dreams of a large, rounded, pillar-shaped object, a freudian will interpret it as a phallus,
while the jung-oriented mind will interpret it as a shivalinga and give it religious connotations.
Beloved of My Heart 8 Osho
CHAPTER 2
Let Love be your Life-style
4 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
[A sannyasin who is returning to the West says: I’m really scared about going back. I wanted to ask
you if you’d help me when I’m back there.]
The fear comes to many people because you go back into a world to which you have always
belonged and now you don’t belong to it anymore. So you are going to a foreign country, as a
stranger, to people who think that they know you. Now you know that they don’t, but they will take it
for granted that they know you. They will go on making contacts with your past, not with you. They
will expect you to behave the way they think you should have behave, and you cannot behave that
way. This whole situation creates a fear.
Fear is always felt at the stomach or at the throat. If it is felt at the stomach it has a certain quality.
If it is felt at the throat, it has a totally different quality. The fear that is felt at the throat is the fear of
communication. It will be difficult for you now to communicate with people. When the fear is felt at
the stomach it is fear of death.
If you go deep in meditation, the fear of death arises and that is felt just below the navel centre, at the
hara, the death centre. If you are going to communicate, the fear will be felt at the throat because the
throat is the centre of expression, communication, relating. When fear arises in relationship to love,
it is at the throat, because the child receives love for the first time from the mother through the throat
centre. That is his first contact with the world. Mother’s breast is his first contact, first relationship,
and that is through the throat centre. That’s why Freudians call small children ’oral’. That is the oral
state of their mind. Whenever you are getting something or giving something, it passes through the
throat centre.
9
CHAPTER 2. LET LOVE BE YOUR LIFE-STYLE
So I can understand... the fear is natural. Don’t try to avoid it and don’t try to suppress it. Don’t try to
forget it, otherwise it will be difficult to get over it. Accept it – it is natural. It is absolutely natural going
back to old friends and not being the old person at all. Your friends will be very much in confusion
about how to relate to you, because we get accustomed to a certain pattern.
Whenever a person starts meditating, his world of relationships has to be changed. One person
changes, then all his relationships – with the wife, children, friends, even enemies – have to change.
He comes to a shattering. He enters into the world again with a new identity.
When you are here as a sannyasin it is one thing. You can relate with people. You live in a commune
of souls who are following the same path, moving in the same direction, living in the same vibe. But
when you go back, the fear will come. It is good in a way.
Once you are back, the fear will be there for not more than a week. So don’t hide. In that one week
meet all the friends and persons to whom you have related in the past, and don’t try to pretend to
be the old self. Within a week it will disappear because you will be able to relate better than ever.
You can become a coward and try to hide. For example, you can go there and change your dress,
and when you go to see a person you don’t wear orange or you hide your mala. Then you will try to
pretend you are the old person and that there is no need for anyone to relate to you in a new way.
Don’t do that.
Never allow fear to dictate your life-style – never. Howsoever difficult it may be, never allow it to
dictate your life-style. Only love should be allowed to dictate your life-style, nothing else. Everything
else is irrelevant.
Just go. For seven days you will be in a trouble; but move as a sannyasin, phone people, contact
them, and tell them that the old person is dead and you are completely new, reborn. Tell them that
now it may be a problem to relate to you because you are absolutely new.
If you can stick to that for only seven days, people start relating to you. In fact they will be happy: a
new friend, a new relationship arises. Something fresh enters into their life also, through you. A new
window opens, a new breeze enters into the room.
I am going to be with you... don’t be worried. Whenever you feel any fear arising in the throat, take
the locket in your hand and remember me.
Start working there as a vehicle for me. It will be very very much easier for you to work and your
work will become very skillful. It will have a great depth to it. Allow me. Just be empty – as if you
don’t know who you are and you don’t know what you are going to do, how you are going to reply;
how you are going to respond in a situation. Simply wait for the situation to arise and let me respond
through you. If you allow me, within three weeks you will be able to feel an absolute contact. Then
you become a link. If you fail, I fail. If you succeed, I succeed. It is nothing to do with you. You
can laugh about it. Whether you succeed or fail, it has nothing to do with you; then your whole
functioning will be different.
Just today I was reading about a zen master, Tozan – a very famous zen master. The story says that
the gods wanted to see him, but they couldn’t because he was just an emptiness. They would enter
Beloved of My Heart 10 Osho
CHAPTER 2. LET LOVE BE YOUR LIFE-STYLE
into him from this side and that, they would pass through him, but he was nowhere to be found. He
was a nowhere-ness, a nothingness... so empty of himself that they could not see him. They were
very curious to see a man who had become empty, so they played a trick.
They went to the kitchen as Tozan was coming from his morning walk and took a few handfuls of
rice and wheat and threw it on his path. In a zen monastery that is almost a sin because it is very
disrespectful to rice and wheat. Everything should be respected because everything is divine. It has
nothing to do with ordinary economics, nothing to do with a gandhian ideology – because that type
of ideology is nothing but rationalised miserliness. This had nothing to do with that. It is a respect
for everything. Everything that exists and has existed, is divine and should be respected.
So in a zen monastery nothing is wasted; one should be careful, and alert. They played this trick
and threw on his path a few hand-fuls of rice and wheat. When Tozan came he could not believe it
– that any disciple could do that. Who could do it? Who could be so careless and disrespectful?
This idea arose in him, and suddenly a self was there and the gods could see him. The emptiness
was no more empty. Suddenly an idea had crystallised; an attitude, a mind had come. For a
moment a cloud appeared in the blue sky and the gods could see this man, Tozan. Then the cloud
disappeared because the idea disappeared. I like the story very much.
Whenever there is an idea, you are, and then a cloud arises. And there is not only one cloud. There
are so many ideas in you, millions of clouds which continuously haunt you, covering you in layers
and layers of cloud. Your inner sky is completely hidden. You can’t even have a glimpse of it.
Even a small idea like ’Who has been so careless?’ – it was nothing special, nothing much to worry
about. It was just a curious ’Who has been so careless?’ but it was enough! If you see the morning
sun and you say ’How beautiful’ – enough! It is just a small fragment but it creates an inner pressure
in you, and that’s why you immediately want to say to somebody ’Look, how beautiful the morning
is!’
That is a release. The pressure has been inside and when you talk it is catharted; you release it.
You feel good, you have said it. If you cannot find anybody, it will haunt you more. If you can write
a letter, then you are finished with it. Our mind is continuously overflooded with ideas, emotions,
sentiments.
By and by relax, be empty. Just go as an emptiness. Don’t try to protect yourself in any way because
that will make you closed. Fear is there – accept it. Relax and let it be there. Remain with it. Don’t
try to do anything against it because whatsoever you do out of fear will create more fear. Just accept
it. What can you do?
[Just as Osho uttered the last words, a cuckoo, quietly calling out to a friend, suddenly broke into
loud song, filling the stillness of the evening.]
The cuckoo is going crazy – what can you do? Just like that!
If the throat is feeling fear, okay; accept and relax. And I am coming with you.
[Osho tells a newly arrived sannyasin to take part in the forthcoming meditation camp, adding... ]
Beloved of My Heart 11 Osho
CHAPTER 2. LET LOVE BE YOUR LIFE-STYLE
Even if you feel a little tired, don’t be worried. This is just to see which meditation can go to the
deepest layers of your being. Once it is known, everything can be very easily disciplined.
Once a meditation that penetrates you very deeply is known, other meditations can be found which
can be a help to it. Otherwise sometimes it is possible that you can choose two things which are
antagonistic to each other. You may feel good with both because the mind is very dualistic, very
divided. But if you do two contradictory things together, it can never reach to the core of your being.
You will always be in a certain conflict and your energy will be moving against itself. The whole
energy has to become one flow.
I would suggest that you continue Yoga. If you feel it is tiring to do it every day, then let it be every
alternate day or twice a week, but let it be fixed. If you just do it when you feel like it, it will be just
an exercise to relax the body, but it will not go very deep. If it is possible, let it be alternate days. But
fix a time, and on those days, whether you feel like it or not, it has to be done so that it becomes an
inbuilt programme in the body.
There is no need to do many yoga asanas; just two, three or four. Whatsoever makes you feel good,
you can choose.
[Another sannyasin says: I’m going back to the West and I’m afraid of not accepting you there. Even
here I don’t understand fully... I want to keep flowering when I leave here.]
Your problem is deeper. It is not only of fear. It is more of doubt, more of non-trust.
Fear arises when you have trust – then you are afraid of the situation back home and how you are
going to face it. You are not afraid of the situation back home – you are afraid of your own doubting
mind. [The previous sannyasin’s] problem is totally different. She has total trust. Her problem is not
of doubt or anything. She is afraid of how to face the world and the old situation there.
You are not afraid of that. You are afraid of yourself.
This has to be understood: you cannot trust me if you don’t trust yourself. The doubt is not against
me. The doubt is against yourself. You don’t love yourself... you don’t trust yourself. Whatsoever
you do, a basic mistrust continues to be there. Because you cannot trust yourself, how can you trust
your trust? Impossible. If you don’t love yourself, how can you love somebody? The basic thing is
lacking somewhere.
But if you are aware, much can be done. Doubt enters in the mind only when you are in a sort of a
slumber, sleep. Doubt enters only when there is a darkness inside. They have an affinity – darkness
and doubt. If there is a little light inside, doubt is not, and cannot enter there.
So it is good that you are feeling a little alertness that you may betray yourself. So do one thing
– decide something. Decision helps, because once you have decided something and the doubt
comes, you have somewhere to stand upon. If you don’t have any decision and doubt comes, it
takes you over; you don’t have any shelter. It is just like it is raining and you have a small hut. You
can go inside. Let it rain – you remain untouched.
Beloved of My Heart 12 Osho
CHAPTER 2. LET LOVE BE YOUR LIFE-STYLE
So make a decision that for six months, whatsoever happens, you will continue at least one
meditation, you will wear orange. Whatsoever happens, whatsoever doubts come, for six months
you are not going to listen to the doubts. Let them come – you will stick to your decision. If you
can do that you will come out of these six months in a totally different way. Your quality will be more
stabilised, crystallised.
Sometimes very small decisions help, very small decisions. The whole thing is just to carry them,
because they give you an integration. If you don’t carry them, they are very dangerous because they
will create more unconfidence.
That’s why I insist for a certain dress, a mala. It has nothing to do with spirituality. It has something
to do with you as you are. It is just something for you so you can remain in a continuity. Moving in
ochre in the West will create trouble. People will look at you. You will look strange, odd, and that will
make you alert and aware. You can use that situation.
You will not be lost in the mob, and when people become alert about you, you also become alert.
Immediately something inside you clicks. People are looking at you – you walk differently, you sit
differently. You become more attentive because people are watching you.
So these six months will be hard, but once you can pass through them you will become completely
transformed. ,If you cannot make a decision, then it is better that you leave sannyas. Make that
decision. You understand me? Because if you go back and then you leave sannyas, that will be very
shattering to your centring – very much shattering.
If you go back and your doubt possesses you and you leave sannyas, you don’t meditate, and
you don’t use orange, that will be more shattering, more destructive, because then you will lose all
confidence that you may have in yourself. It is better that you go as a non-sannyasin so that you
don’t carry anything fragile which can be broken. If you are carrying it and it is fragile, and you are
going into a very contrary world, then be alert. If you can carry it for only six months, you will come
out of it very new, with clarity and trust.
[Another sannyasin says: I feel very shaky in the knees and the tummy and the throat and my hands.
I fall asleep during the lectures, and I feel tired – like I’m being shattered.]
So get shattered! Why are you resisting? Why are you creating any trouble? Just get shattered and
be finished with it. Once you are shattered there is no problem – no tightness, no shakiness. If you
resist, it continues. There is no need to resist. Just allow it and let it be settled. You just have a good
laugh, that’s all.
The problem arises because we go on doing contrary things.
My whole effort is to shatter you. And your whole effort is to protect yourself. Then shakiness arises
and you feel a trembling inside and everything feels disturbed. You want one thing and I am trying to
do something else. I am trying to destructure you so your old armour is no more there. I am trying
to break the shell so you can come out of your egg – and you are trying to protect it. So of course
you feel shaky and troubled and tired and tight.
Beloved of My Heart 13 Osho
CHAPTER 2. LET LOVE BE YOUR LIFE-STYLE
Either tell me that I should stop... then I will not try any shattering; I will leave you untouched and
then you will be okay ... or listen to me and get shattered. Cooperate with me and be finished with
it. Mm? What shall I do, tell me.
[She answers: keep going!]
Good, good... And in the lecture you can fall asleep. Enjoy it; there is nothing wrong in sleep.
And don’t say that in lecture time you fall asleep. Rather say that you listen to my lectures while
asleep! (a chuckle) That is better and more positive. There is nothing wrong in it. Sleep is good.
There also you must be resisting – trying not to fall asleep. Many people fall asleep... Don’t create
a problem about it; enjoy it.
Whatsoever is important will be heard by you even in your sleep. You may not remember it but it will
become part of your being and when the time arises, it will be there, available. So from tomorrow,
you simply relax. Don’t fight the tendency to go to sleep.
And I see everything is going well – that’s why you are feeling shaky!
[Osho gives a name for a new centre.]
Pallas.
It is an indian flower, a very beautiful flower, a red flower. It grows in the forest, a wild flower. It grows
as a big forest... the whole forest of pallas, and when it flowers, you cannot see anything – just red
flowers all over the forest... almost as if the forest is on fire because all leaves disappear and there
are only flowers and flowers. And that’s what I am creating – an orange flame....
Beloved of My Heart 14 Osho
CHAPTER 3
Life is in Movement
5 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
Dervish means a sufi mystic, a sufi seeker, and anand means bliss – a blissful seeker.
Sufism is a mohammedan path...
It is just like Zen. Zen is the essence of Buddhism and Sufism is the essence of Mohammedanism,
Islam, just as Yoga is the very essence of Hinduism. Only the names are different, but if you try
to understand them, they are all one: Sufism, Yoga, Zen. The essential thing is one but their
terminology is different.
Sufism has a mohammedan terminology, a very beautiful terminology.
[A sannyasin says: I ’m still getting migraine and I feel it must be something very deep. I don’t go
into it as much – I keep on working and it often dissolves. But often I long for night-time to just go
into oblivion.]
No, it is nothing deep. Even the head is not very deep, so how can a headache be? You have just
got into the habit of it. It is really no more a disease but just a learned habit.
It can happen that a real disease may disappear and it will leave just a trace. The mind takes the
cue from that trace and starts imagining it again and again and again. But as far as you and your
misery is concerned, it is the same; whether it is real or unreal makes no difference. Just by saying
it is unreal or mental does not help at all because you suffer almost in the same way. I see it is just
a learned pattern.
15
CHAPTER 3. LIFE IS IN MOVEMENT
So you have to unlearn it. Migraine is more or less always a habit. You have much energy. That’s why
when you are using it, the headache disappears. When you are not using it the energy accumulates
and moves into the channel and again the headache is there. So if you are really into the work
deeply, the headache may dissolve into it because it will not be getting energy.
Forget all about it. Paying attention to it is bad; even thinking about it is bad. If it happens, it is okay.
Just say, ’Hello, how are you?’ and forget all about it. Put your energy more and more into work. You
have a tremendous amount of energy, an extraordinary amount of energy. You are not a low energy
person; you are a high energy person.
All the energy has to be used creatively, otherwise it will give you trouble. Even energy, something
so valuable as energy, can become a curse if you don’t use it. So simply use it. Move into work more
and more and let work be your meditation. Don’t pay much attention to the migraine, and suddenly
one day you will recognise that for many days it has not happened. But then don’t worry about that!
It may be concerned with your sex because it is concerned with energy. Anything concerned with
energy is also concerned with sex. Migraine has its origin somewhere in sex energy. The energy
arises too much at the sex centre and you don’t know what to do with it, so it takes its roots
wheresoever it can. Now, up to your third eye centre the energy is moving in a haphazard way;
that’s why you get the migraine. If the same energy moves in a right channel, you will start having
many yogic experiences, because it is the same energy and at the same place where migraine
starts. It is the same place where people start having tremendously beautiful experiences of light,
colours, smells. But your energy is moving in a zig-zag way.
Once your migraine has disappeared for a few days I will give you a method to move that energy
into a right channel. Right now if you try to move it, it will move into the old channel again, because
the old channel has become very very deep. Whenever you try to move the energy, it will move in
the old channel and will give you a headache. For a few days those channels have to be stopped
completely.
So just be indifferent. Put your energy somewhere else so that the energy moves into the work and
the level of energy falls below so it doesn’t reach the head. Because this energy is moving so fast
and reaches your head so easily, it may prove a blessing later on. When the right channel has been
broken, you may be very easily able to bring the energy up. So don’t be worried about it.
[The encounter group is attending darshan. One participant says: I got angry and hit the wall. When
I found energy did move, it really amazed me. I mean, how can all energy be stopped by fear?]
Fear can stop energy because basically fear is nothing but a shrinking. When you are happy you
expand, when you are unafraid you expand. When you are afraid you shrink, you hide in your shell,
because if you go out there may be some danger. You shrink in every way – in love, in relationships,
in meditation, in every way. You are afraid to go out. You become a turtle and you shrink inside.
Because of that shrinking, fear stops all movement of energy, and if you remain in fear continuously,
as many people live, constantly in fear, by and by the elasticity of energy is lost. Then you become
a stagnant pool. You are no more flowing, no more a river. Then one feels more and more dead,
more and more dead every day.
Beloved of My Heart 16 Osho
CHAPTER 3. LIFE IS IN MOVEMENT
Life is in contact. Life is in flow... Life is in movement. To be stagnant is to commit suicide. It is just
as if you bring your hand near a flame. The moment you feel it is hot, your hand shrinks back. But
this is good... this is a natural protection.
One should use fear when needed. When the house is on fire you have to escape. You don’t try
being unafraid there or you will be a fool. Fear has a natural use. One should remain capable of
shrinking also because there are moments when one needs to stop the flow. But those moments
should not become one’s habitual pattern. One should not start living in that way continuously. One
should be able to go out, to come in, to go out, to come in. This is the flexibility: expansion, shrinking,
expansion, shrinking. It is just like breathing. You breathe out, the chest falls down, the lungs shrink.
You breathe in, the lungs expand.
People who are very much afraid don’t breathe deeply, because even that expansion gives fear.
They start breathing very shallowly. Their chest will shrink; they will have a sunken chest.
So that’s right. Try to find out ways to make your energy move. Even sometimes anger is good. At
least it makes your energy move. If you have to choose between fear and anger, choose anger. At
least it will make you more dynamic, more alive. At least you will have some sort of contact with
somebody. You may have a good fight with somebody but at least it is some sort of contact. You will
not be frozen, you will have some warmth.
So always remember that... but don’t go to the other extreme. Expansion is good but you should not
become addicted to it. It should not become again a sort of incapacity so that you cannot shrink.
The real thing to remember is flexibility: the capacity to move from one end to another, from one
extreme to another. A man is young in proportion to his flexibility. Watch a small child. He’s so soft,
tender and flexible. As you grow old everything becomes tight, hard, inflexible. That is the old age.
Remember, a man can remain absolutely young to the very moment of death if he remains flexible.
That will give you a depth of life, a qualitative life.
[Another participant says: This was the first time I’ve ever done any sort of group with anybody
anywhere and it really frightened me. I get so tight that I can’t let go. I become tight here (indicating
her belly) and when I’m really under pressure I feel sick.]
Your training in Yoga is the cause of it. That’s what I mean when I say that Yoga is not enough. It
makes you very controlled, and every sort of control is a sort of repression. So you repress and
then you forget all about the repression. It moves into the stomach, and near the diaphragm all
those repressed things collect. The stomach is the only space where you can go on throwing things;
nowhere else is there any space. The english expression is good when people say ’I cannot stomach
it’. That is exactly the right expression.
You need many more groups to help you explode. The day your control explodes, you will feel so
free, so alive. You will feel reborn, because it will connect your divided body. The diaphragm is the
place where the body is divided; the upper and lower. In all the old religious teachings, the lower
is condemned and the upper seems to be really something high, something superior, something
holier. It is nothing. The body is one and this bifurcation is dangerous; it makes you split. By and by
you deny many things in life. Whatsoever you exclude from your life will take its revenge some day.
It will come as a disease.
Beloved of My Heart 17 Osho
CHAPTER 3. LIFE IS IN MOVEMENT
Now medical researchers say that cancer is nothing but too much stress inside. If you continue
holding this, it can give you a certain type of deep stress there. It can become dangerous.
Cancer exists only in very very repressed societies, otherwise not. The more civilised a society, the
more cancer is possible. The more people are cultivated, cultured, the more cancer is possible. It
cannot exist in a primitive society, because in a primitive society the whole body is accepted. There
is no condemnation. Nothing is lower and nothing is higher. Everything simply is.
It will be a little difficult for you because it will go against your whole training up to now, but once it
is released you will become for the first time a real yogi. Then you can discipline yourself without
repressing. If you can discipline yourself without repression, you will have a totally different type
of being .. . a grace, an inner freedom. It will not be in any way an effort to continuously keep
something down. There will be no effort involved. The whole stress will disappear and you will be
flowing and flowering.
[Another group-member says: I found that I enjoy fighting very much.
The group-leader feels as though she plays a role rather than being the way she is.]
Play, but play knowingly....
Play your games, whatsoever they are; don’t repress. If the idea comes, play the game. Play it as
perfectly as possible, but fully alert. You are a dramatic personality so enjoy it, and others will also
enjoy it.
If you feel like being a child, then be a child and do things a child is expected to do. But be alert that
this is a game you are playing and don’t bring in any top-dog to stop it. Don’t say, ’lt is bad and I
should not be playing.’ Don’t bring any should into it. Just enjoy it as a pure game. It will help much
release.
Even if a person plays a role there is some reason in it. That role has some significance to the
person. If the game is played perfectly, something from the unconscious will disappear, evaporate,
and you will be freed from a burden.
For example if you want to play like a child, that means that in your childhood something has
remained incomplete. You could not be a child as you wanted to be; somebody stopped you.
People made you more serious, forced you beyond your age, made you to appear more adult and
mature than you were. Something has remained incomplete there. That incompletion demands to
be completed and it will continue to haunt you. So finish it. Nothing is wrong in it. You could not be
a child that time, back in the past; now you can be.
Once you can be totally in it, you will see that it has disappeared and then it will never come again.
Beloved of My Heart 18 Osho
CHAPTER 4
Become Part of my Family
6 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
[A sannyasin says: I’ve really enjoyed being here. I haven’t really bothered to become integrated
with the ashram but I enjoy your lectures very much.]
Next time, try to get in tune with the ashram also. You can enjoy my lectures, you can meditate, but
if you are not in tune with all that is going on here and if you don’t mix in totally, you will miss many
things. You will miss many things that were easily available. The quality of your understanding of
my lectures will deepen if you get in tune with the activity that goes on here. Then you are not an
outsider. You become part of the family, and that helps. Resistance is dropped.
That’s the whole whole meaning of sannyas – to become part of my family, so you don’t think in
terms of your own ego or in terms of your individuality. Rather you start thinking in terms of me and
sannyas and-the work that is going on.
By and by you put yourself aside, and the work becomes more important, more valuable. That will
deepen your understanding and will help many blocks inside your being to drop. Otherwise one
goes on defending in subtle ways. These are all defence measures. One is afraid of being lost so
one goes on holding, controlling, not mixing, but these are all ego-strengthening ideas – and the
ego has to be dropped.
So it is good that you understand me, but if understanding me does not help you to drop your
defences and resistances, then it is not going as deep as it should go. Listening to me can be
enjoyed, but then it will remain just an enjoyment. Just as you enjoy a movie or TV of music, you can
enjoy listening to me. But that will come like a wave and then go and you will remain unchanged.
19
CHAPTER 4. BECOME PART OF MY FAMILY
Good... enjoy it, but let it not be just an enjoyment. Let it become a growth, because the more you
grow, the more you will be able to enjoy it. It depends upon your sensitivity.
It is like classical music – the more you understand, the more you enjoy; the more you enjoy, the
more you understand. A moment comes when you are completely lost. Only the music remains,
throbbing, vibrating, pulsating all around you, and you are nowhere to be found. Remember that.
One day let it happen that you disappear and only I am vibrating around you – throbbing, pulsating,
echoing and re-echoing. And you are at a loss... you cannot see where you are. You cannot pinpoint
where your being is. You are completely lost as if a drop disappears into the ocean.
But that will happen only when you become part of my work. So next time when you come, drop all
resistance.
[A sannyasin said he was feeling frustrated and imbalanced in his relationships with people. Osho
asked him if he were currently in a relationship, to which he replied that he was not. Osho suggested
it would be helpful for him to move into love.... ]
You need some relationship... it will settle you.
Love is a very basic need... as basic as food. Without food and without love, you will start shrinking.
Without food, the body will start dying. Without love, your innermost being starts dying.
You need some very very warm love relationship. You need a woman who can love you like a mother,
and immediately your energies will settle. Otherwise there can be very great trouble... you can split
into two personalities. Love brings you together. Without love, everybody has two minds – the right
and left hemispheres, which are separate. Just a very small bridge exists between the two.
When you love a person deeply that bridge becomes more and more strong... becomes wider,
bigger. In a really deep, intimate relationship, a moment comes when right and left hemispheres are
no more two separate things. They become one whole. That’s why love looks so irrational. Love
looks so absurd and blind to people who are too much hung up in their heads. It is irrational because
both the polarities meet and mingle and become one.
It is a tremendous chaos but very beautiful. And all that is beautiful comes out of chaos. All the stars
are born out of chaos. These groups are really to create a chaos in you... to bring to your focus
whatsoever is the real situation. They don’t lie – they make you aware of the truth. These groups
are really like a diagnosis – and that is half the therapy, more than half.
So passing through these group experiences, you have come to feel your inner conflict, the division.
Sometimes you are one person and sometimes you are another. Whenever energy moves into one
direction, you are one. When energy moves into another direction, you are another. Now a synthesis
is needed, a unification, a yoga. Union is needed... and the inner union becomes easily possible if
you are moving in some outer union also. Then the outer union become just a milieu in which the
inner milieu can happen. The inner can also happen without the outer, but it is going to be a very
hard way – and there is no need. That is the way of the monk, who tries to create an inner synthesis
without creating any outer harmony around him.
Beloved of My Heart 20 Osho
CHAPTER 4. BECOME PART OF MY FAMILY
He lives in a desert as far as the outside is concerned, and inside he creates an oasis. But it is
difficult to protect an oasis in a desert. It is easier to protect an oasis in green and wild scenery,
because the whole scene will help you. That is the path of the devotee. These are the two basic
paths: the path of the monk and the path of the devotee, the bhakta. The bhakta never goes anywhere. He uses his love situation for an inner transformation.
So move in a love relationship, but remember, don’t be lost in it. As there is a problem that without
love it is very difficult to come to an inner synthesis, with love there is also a problem. You may get
involved so much in it that you can be completely lost. You can lose your moorings and your roots
in it. Then outside there will be a very green land and inside there will be a desert. You understand
me? These are the three possibilities.
The best is that inside also you have a flowering world, and outside a corresponding synchronisity
with it, a deep harmony... a love world. That’s my whole effort – to bring love and meditation together
to you. The meditation will give you an inner beauty, grace, and love will help that inner beauty and
grace from the outside. It will become a protection and a help.
Move into a relationship with the idea that out of love you have to attain to meditation. And love
can help tremendously if you are rightly aware. Otherwise love is very destructive. It destroys many
people. It simply gives trouble, anxiety, anguish, sadness, depression, frustration. But nothing is
wrong in love. Something is wrong within, the person, in his attitude. He couldn’t use love.
You can use fire to warm your house, to heat your house. You can also burn the house. But nothing
is wrong in fire. It can be your friend; it can be your enemy – it depends on you. So don’t be lost in
love.
And always remember that the inner synthesis is needed. The outer is just a means to the inner but
the inner is the goal.
[Primal Therapy group is present. Osho describes Primal Therapy thus:]
Once something is exposed, it evaporates. Hide a thing and it remains with you. It is just like taking
the roots out of the earth. Once you have exposed the roots to the air and to the sun, the tree is
dead. If the roots remain deep down in the earth, you can go on cutting the tree again and again,
but again it will sprout.
Never fight with branches. The whole effort in these groups is to make you alert not to fight with
branches and leaves. It is futile. Bring the roots up and see exactly where the problem is.
[A visitor says: I have been practising the art of living in the ways of cooking and eating and trying
to do well what I was doing. I felt myself growing this way.
I have heard many people talking about groups here, but I don’t feel I need them.]
But you have not done anything like a group, so how can you feel that they are not for you?
No, that cannot be. But if you don’t want to, there is no need to do groups. But if you listen to my
suggestion, I will say that you do one so that you can really feel whether it is for you or not. That will
Beloved of My Heart 21 Osho
CHAPTER 4. BECOME PART OF MY FAMILY
be an experience. It is never good to decide beforehand, because it may be just a fear deep down.
What you are calling your feeling that it is not for you, may be fear. I rarely come across a person for
whom groups are not helpful – and never a person who comes from the West.
Centuries of repression are there. You may not be aware but it is in the unconscious. And that
creates a fear, a fear of explosion. You are afraid of becoming aware of certain things which you
have taken for granted are not in you. You can live blissfully oblivious of them but one day or other
you will have to face them, and the sooner you face them, the better. There are a few things which
can only be solved at a particular age. When the age has gone, those problems cannot be solved.
For example if somebody becomes aware of a deep sexuality at a much later age, it becomes very
problematic. It is better if he had become aware when he was young.
Just the other day I was reading about a christian missionary who went to a dark corner of Africa.
He was hard at work trying to convert a native chief. Now the chief was very old and the missionary
was very ’old testament’. His version of Christianity leaned heavily on ’thou-shalt-nots’. The savage
listened patiently....
’I do not understand,’ he said at last. ’You tell me that I must not take my neighbour’s wife.’
’That’s right,’ said the missionary.
’Nor his ivory or his oxen.’
’Quite right.’
’And I must not dance a war dance and then ambush him on the trail and then kill him.’
’Absolutely right!’
’But I cannot do any of these things,’ said the savage regretfully. ’I am too old. So to be old and to
be a Christian, they are the same thing!’
Always remember that there are problems that belong to a particular age. Solve them then and
there, and it is good. But otherwise, this is my experience, that there are many people, millions of
people, who have not solved their childhood problems. They need Primal Therapy.
Primal Therapy simply means bringing their childhood back to them. They will relive it in imagination
and whatsoever has remained incomplete will have to be completed in imagination. Then those
problems will disappear. It is sometimes very hard to go back to the old wounds and to let them
again overpower you; to again suffer those things which you have been thinking had completely
disappeared. For example someone has insulted you when you were a small child. That wound is
there. You have forgotten it but it continues to function inside your unconscious, and it has to be
healed.
A child is born; it is a very critical moment, very traumatic, and he suffers much because his whole
world in the womb is destroyed. That was the only world he knew... that was his whole life. Then he
Beloved of My Heart 22 Osho
CHAPTER 4. BECOME PART OF MY FAMILY
passed through the birth canal, which is a painful process, almost suffocating. Then he is outside in
the world on his own, absolutely helpless... many painful experiences, and there is no way, ordinarily,
to erase them.
A Primal Therapy group will take you back on an inner journey. It will help your unconscious pains to
bubble up, to surface. Of course it is going to be painful, but once you are relieved of that pain you
will feel a certain cleaning; you will become bathed and cleaned. Your energy will be flowing more
easily. Those wounds have disappeared, those blocks have been dropped. You will find fresh life
coming to you. You can never know unless you go through it.
And all these groups are for particular problems. This is my feeling – that you are afraid of things
which may surface: anger, sex, greed, or whatsoever. You have maintained yourself somehow and
you have maintained well; you have made a beautiful house on a volcano. Now you are afraid to
think that there is even a volcano. You are living so comfortably and conveniently so why bother?
Why dig a hole and see whether there is a volcano or not? Even if it is there, better not to think
about it. But this is a very ostrich-like attitude, and I don’t think it is going to help.
I will suggest you do only one group – and do it really so you can come to feel. Maybe you are
right, maybe there is no need, but don’t decide that beforehand. This is the way we lose many
opportunities of growth, many opportunities in which some unfamiliar thing might have happened.
But we say we don’t need them. How can you decide?
Always decide something by experimentation. Never decide anything a priori. Do the experiment
and if it is not useful, you are finished forever with it. But still, think about it. I think Encounter will be
very good. It is a very soft group... it will not disturb you too much. Then if you feel certain that you
don’t need groups, very good. Then there is no question, no problem.
[The visitor replies: Well, I think that in day-to-day living I can express my feelings very much. I
wonder if I can experience emotions stronger in the group than I do in daily life.]
I also wonder, but we have to see that through experimentation; there is no other way. Maybe you
are right – and it will be good if you are right. If I am wrong it will be good! But there is no way to
decide it beforehand. First do the camp. The camp may bring a feeling to you to do something.
My suggestion always is never to lose an opportunity which can give you something unfamiliar.
Never cling to the past and always remain open and experimentative... always ready to walk on a
path which you have never walked before. Who knows? – even if it proves useless, it will be an
experience.
Edison was working on a certain experiment for almost three years continuously and he failed seven
hundred times. All his colleagues, his students, became completely frustrated. He would come
every morning happy and bubbling with joy, and ready to start again. It was too much: seven
hundred times and three years wasted! Everybody was almost certain that nothing was going to
come out of it. The whole thing seemed to be useless... just a whim.
They all gathered together and said, ’We will become mad! This man goes on being happy and
every day he comes and starts again as if he has completely forgotten that three years have been
completely wasted.’
Beloved of My Heart 23 Osho
CHAPTER 4. BECOME PART OF MY FAMILY
They talked to Edison and told him, ’We have failed seven hundred times. Now it is a complete
failure. We have not achieved anything. We have to stop.’
Edison laughed uproariously. He said, ’What are you talking about? Failed? We have succeeded in
knowing that seven hundred methods won’t be of any help. If there are one thousand possibilities,
we have closed seven hundred. Now there are only three hundred there. We are coming closer and
closer to truth every day! Who has told you that we have failed? We have knocked on seven hundred
doors and they were not the right doors, but we have learned one thing. There was no other way to
learn that they were not the right doors. If we had not knocked, we had no way of knowing. We may
have been standing on the first door continuously thinking that this is the right door, but now we are
certain that seven hundred doors are false. This is a great achievement!’
This is the basic scientific attitude: if you can decide that something is false, you are coming closer
to the truth. Truth is not available in the market so that you can go directly and order it. It is not
ready-made, available. You have to experiment.
So what I suggest is, always remain experimentative. And never become smug. Never think that
whatsoever you are doing is perfect. It is never perfect. It is always possible to improve upon it; it is
always possible to make it more perfect.
[A sannyasin said that she seemed always to fall in love with people who were not available, and that
she would like to fall in love with someone and have them fall in love with her, but that she seemed
to always be attracted to people she couldn’t have.
Osho said that unconsciously she did not really want to fall in love, so she chose people with
whom her love could never be fulfilled. He said she chose people not for themselves but for their
inaccessibility, and that if they became available she would drop the idea of pursuing them.
She said she felt she either tried to keep people away or would simply go and grab at them – and
that didn’t work either.... ]
Go and do that! Do something. And I’m not joking when I say to go and do it. Do it! I mean business!
You will be very happy once you get out of this circle you have created for yourself, this very selfdestructive structure which is almost suicidal. If you don’t love you go on destroying your life. Love
is life, and through love all other doors of prayer and God and everything, open. If the door of love
is closed, you are left alone like a desert island and then there is no way to go anywhere. Then you
get more and more fed up with yourself.
People take pride in being suicidal – drop that pride. Just look at the fact. And every human being
is beautiful. Don’t ask the impossible – just find someone who is available.
There are women, I know, who will become interested only in a married person, because then they
can create trouble. If the person is not married they are not interested. This is their mathematics:
if he were worth something, some other woman would have got hold of him before. Nobody has
bothered about him – he is still a bachelor – so it certainly proves that he is not worth worrying
about. At least he is not of the standard they would like.
Beloved of My Heart 24 Osho
CHAPTER 4. BECOME PART OF MY FAMILY
Once the man has a woman then other women start becoming interested. He must have something!
They are more interested in creating jealousy in the other woman than love in the man.
They are more interested in defeating the other woman. Their whole seduction, their whole coquetry,
will be concerned with the woman: how they can defeat the woman; how they can prove themselves
to be better looking, more loving, more beautiful, more charming, and that the other woman is
nothing. Once the woman has broken away from the man they will not be interested in the man at
all. The whole purpose is finished.
So never do that... that is ugly. And it is not going to help you, because you are moving in a wrong
direction. Find someone, or allow someone to find you. It is good to play the game of hide and seek,
but don’t hide so much that the other gets fed up with the game and goes home! Then there will be
no point.
Children play hide and seek but they always hide in such a way that the other can find them. It is
never made almost impossible. It is a challenge and they go on making noises so the other knows
where they are. The other goes on playing the game of seeking them, knowing where they are. But
if you hide so much that it becomes impossible to seek you, then the whole game is finished.
Nothing is wrong with you – it is just an old habit. It will melt with a little more understanding. Do
something against it... that is the only way to break a habit.
[A sannyasin participant of the Tathata group says: I lost my frightened streak – it was really
unbelievable. But also I found that I am dead. I don’t feel anything towards people... ]
That will come. There is nothing to worry about.
You have put your life in certain fears too much. Because those fears are gone you will feel as if
you are dead for a few days, because the old channels for the life to flow are no more there. Many
people love only because they are afraid. They think that they are loving but deep down there is fear
– fear of being left alone, fear of isolation.
But if fear disappears, suddenly they will see that their love has also disappeared because basically,
deep down it was fear, not love. Many people pray because they are afraid. They go to the church
and temple and pray. If their fear really disappears they will stop going to the church because the
fear was the base of their prayer; their god was nothing but fear personified. Now the fear is no more
there, they will become godless.
This happens to many people because we don’t know exactly what we are doing with our life. We
call it love... maybe it is something else. We call it prayer; maybe it is something else. We call it
meditation; maybe it is something else. The mind is such a confusion that it is very difficult to know
exactly where the problem is. Once you start changing one thing, you will become aware that the
mind goes on deceiving you in many ways.
The dropping of fear is not enough. It is a negative thing. It is good to drop it but not enough. Now
you will have to bring love to your heart... and it can come only when fear is dropped.
Beloved of My Heart 25 Osho
CHAPTER 5
Man has to Live in Yes
7 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
[A sannyasin says: I feel very good since the Primal group. I feel aware of my feminine part
somehow.]
That’s very good. Ordinarily we go on repressing one part of the being because we are taught to
be males or to be females. No society allows that man is bi-sexual, that he is both; that man is not
a fixed identity, not somehow static, but a dynamic process. So sometimes you are more a female,
less a male. Sometimes you are more a male, less a female.
Male and female are just emphases. They are not fixed things. While you are loving, feeling soft,
sensitive, and surrendering to some experience, you are more of a female. When you are frightened,
angry, aggressive, not letting go, you are more a male. And the same is true for women.
So always remember to never get fixed. Allow... whatsoever happens is good. And always
remember that you are continuously changing, river-like, flowing. In the morning you may be a
male. By the evening you may become a female. But ordinarily the society does not allow this, so
when your energy is becoming female then too, you go on insisting that you are male. That creates
a contradiction. The energy is becoming soft and you go on pretending that you are a male. That
creates a bifurcation in your energies. Then you are not moving with the thing that is happening; you
are holding yourself back. By and by you become more and more confused. You don’t know who
you are because you don’t listen to the process of life. You have some fixed ideas and you impose
them on life.
Always listen to life itself – and life is continuously changing. It is good that everything goes on
changing, otherwise you will be dead.
26
CHAPTER 5. MAN HAS TO LIVE IN YES
It is a very good indication that you are feeling the female arising. Allow it. Your mind will tend to
repress it again. But just by and by forget that you are a man or a woman. Remember that there
are a few moments when you are more of a woman. These are both your polarities and you swing
from one to another. Enjoy this swing, mm? That will keep you more flexible and more alive, more
perceptive, sensitive.
[A sannyasin, an air-hostess, said that she had recently moved from her large penthouse to a small
room, which felt much more comfortable and peaceful.]
That’s very good. It seems that many times we go on carrying many things which are useless, and
we never think why we are carrying them. They can become almost a crushing weight.
Needs are very few and a man who understands what is needful will always be happy and blissful.
Desires are many, needs are few. Needs can be fulfilled; desires, never. A desire is a need gone
crazy. It is impossible to fulfill it. The more you try to fulfill it, the more it goes on asking, asking,
asking.
There is a sufi story that when Alexander died and he reached heaven, he was carrying all his weight
– his whole kingdom, gold, diamonds – of course not in reality, but in an idea. Ideas have as much
weight; in fact an idea is the real weight. He was burdened too much by being Alexander.
The gatekeeper started laughing and he said ’Why are you carrying so much of a burden?’
Alexander said ’What burden?’ because really he was carrying nothing. Everything was in the
head, but the head was very heavy.
The gatekeeper gave him a scale and put an eye on one side of the scale. He told Alexander to put
all his weight, all his greatness, treasures, kingdom, on the other side of the scale. Alexander put all
his kingdom, all his wealth, his victories, and everything there. That one eye still remained heavier
than all his kingdom, so finding no other way, he himself jumped onto the scales, but still the one
eye remained heavier.
He said to the gatekeeper, ’I cannot understand how such a small eye can be so weighty. What is
it? Are you playing some trick, some magic with me?’
The gatekeeper said, ’This is a human eye. It represents human desire... the outgoing desire.’
’It cannot be fulfilled, howsoever great the kingdom and howsoever great your efforts. Even a single
human eye full of desires cannot be fulfilled.’
Then Alexander said ’Then what is the way to fulfill it?’
The gatekeeper threw a little dust into the eye. The eye immediately blinked and lost all its weight.
It was immediately weightless.
The story is beautiful. A little dust of understanding has to be thrown into the eye of desire. The
desire disappears and only needs remain, and they are not weighty. Needs are very few... needs
are beautiful. Desires are ugly and they make monsters of men. They create mad people.
Beloved of My Heart 27 Osho
CHAPTER 5. MAN HAS TO LIVE IN YES
This has been a good insight for you. Remember it always, and always choose that which is more
peaceful.
Once you start learning how to choose the peaceful, a small room is enough; a small quantity of
food is enough; a few clothes are enough; one lover, a very ordinary man, can be enough of a lover.
But if you go on asking for more and more, then thousands of men are not enough. Even the most
beautiful man is finished sooner or later. Your desire goes on and on. It knows no end... it stops
nowhere.
[A sannyas couple were have problems in their relationship but decided they should remain together.
Osho said that they should be aware that love was not, and could not be, all roses, and that the
decision to be together should be through pain as well as happiness.... ]
The decision to be together should be unconditional. It should not be only if you love me, if you are
sweet to me, if you are this and that to me – no. It is to be together whatsoever – sometimes sweet
and sometimes very salty; sometimes very beautiful and sometimes a monster.
Once you understand that, you have come to a mature love, otherwise love is only baby love. Small
school children fall in love. They think in poetry and romance, and write poems and beautiful letters,
but that’s all childish.
They don’t know what life is going to be. It is a hard struggle.
Because love is one of the most precious jewels, the struggle is very very hard. Only very few people
achieve it.
Because of the decision to be together, don’t avoid fights, otherwise you will start creating trouble
for each other. Because of the decision, don’t avoid fights. Fights are there – be true. Sometimes
bursting in anger is very very beautiful. It cleanses many days’ dirt and disperses many clouds.
Don’t think that because we have decided to be together now, no more anger, no more conflict, no
more fight. If you try that, your love relationship will be dead. You will be together but there will
be no love. Then you will start feeling afraid of each other and you will avoid any situation. The
commitment will not be very deep then.
Because you have decided to be together, fear is no more there. Now you can be true and authentic
to each other, mm? Good!
[The Aum marathon is a five-day group based on the techniques used in the West in therapeutic
communities for former drug-takers. Formerly it comprised forty-eight hours of working on negativity
but recently has been restructured so that it is a negativity marathon followed by a positivity
workshop.]
The Aum marathon is an energy experiment to bring up your negative and positive, to help all sorts
of energies to surface. For the first time you can face yourself as an energy system.
The first thing is to face all your problems, naked, and the Aum will help you to do this. It is
almost hell because the whole basement has to be opened and all the nightmares brought to your
Beloved of My Heart 28 Osho
CHAPTER 5. MAN HAS TO LIVE IN YES
consciousness, but it is a great discipline. After five days you will feel so relieved because once you
have understood where your problem is, you have almost solved it in a way.
[The leader of the group said the first part of the negativity days were not working. We had done
all we could and so the next day we simply sat – and it happened. It happened. And it was very
beautiful.]
Good. Always remember that when you are trying too hard for something to happen, it may not
happen. In fact your very effort creates a tension around you, around others. Your very effort to
penetrate their barrier creates a defense in them and they resist.
But go on. You have to make all efforts, because if you don’t, then the point will never come. That
comes without effort, but only comes after you have made all effort. Suddenly a moment comes
beyond which you cannot do anything; nothing is possible. All hope is lost (Vedant nods his head
knowingly). Immediately in that moment, you relax. And when you relax, everybody else relaxes,
because relaxation is contagious.
When there is no effort on your part, suddenly the other cannot resist any more; for what? with
whom? The defense is left in mid-air; it has nothing to hold it there. It relapses... it falls and shatters
– and then it happens. You have used exactly the right word. It is not something that you do, not
something that is done by the group. It is something that suddenly happens in the group. It is
something that is not personal; it is impersonal. It is an energy that possesses you. But it can
possess you only when you are completely exhausted, when you are completely frustrated.
That is the meaning when Fritz Perls says that skilful frustration in the hands of the therapist is
one of the greatest tools. By and by one becomes skilful in how to create that moment of absolute
frustration; when one comes to a cul-de-sac, and there is no going beyond it, and suddenly all
human effort has become impotent. You cannot do anything. In that very moment something starts
happening for which you were hoping and trying.
This is what in Zen they call a mini satori. You were working for only three, four, five days and you
felt such frustration that you thought ’Drop it. Let these people go. Nothing is happening and the
method is not going to work. These people are wrong... this method is wrong. It is just futile.’
Just think of a zen monk alone in his cell for fifteen or eighteen or even twenty years working, and
continuously frustrated... frustrated, frustrated; nothing but frustration. Then comes the moment
after eighteen years of wasted effort... almost looks like eighteen lives. It almost looks timeless,
as if he has been strug-gling for ever and for ever. And the wall remains there and nothing has
happened. The whole life has gone into dust... gone to the dogs. He starts thinking to leave –
enough is enough! And exact-ly in that moment the first satori happens.
Suddenly he is so full of light. Something penetrates his very core of being. He becomes illuminated.
The old is gone. The person who is struggling is no more. Then something new, absolutely
discontinuous with the past, has happened. This they call the first satori.
In groups also, mini satoris happen. They are mini because the effort has not been very long. By
and by, as people will be getting more and more into it. I will be creating bigger groups continuing
Beloved of My Heart 29 Osho
CHAPTER 5. MAN HAS TO LIVE IN YES
for three months or six months or one year; just a group of twenty people working continuously for
one year. They will come out completely changed. You will not be able to recognise their faces as
being those of the same people who had gone into the group.
So, good. This has been a very beautiful experience of a mini satori. Whenever you feel that it has
happened and you don’t take any credit for it, it is something spiritual. If you take credit for it, again
the ego has been strengthened through it.
Go on working and more and more will become possible. But do all you can do. Never relax before
that point because then it will not happen. If you think that it happens when you don’t do anything so
one should just sit and not do anything, it won’t happen. Make all efforts, and more intense so that it
happens after the second day. If you put all your energy into the group and it puts all its energy into
the effort, even one hour’s effort can be so in-tense that it can happen. It depends on intensity.
But good... very good.
[The assistant leader says: One thing that kept coming up for me was the difficulty in pushing people.
I felt that that is my role – that I have to yell at people, I have to force them – and I often have the
feeling that I ’m torturing people.]
Torture! Yell at them (laughter). That is your work – otherwise they may not be able to come to the
exploding point.
You have to work like heat so that they come to a point where they evaporate; otherwise they will not.
Five days is a small time. They have to be cornered and forced and jumped at from every corner so
their defences break down – and in a moment of sheer terror they drop their armours.
That is the whole life-long pattern. It is not easy to bring them out of their pattern because they have
completely forgotten that they are separate from their pattern. They think they are their pattern so
you have to hammer them. That is part of the process. It is therapeutic.
It is just like surgery. If a surgeon thinks. ’How can I cut this man’s body? Am I a butcher?’ then he
will not be able to do the surgery. He has to be a butcher in deep compassion. He is not against
the man; he is helping the man. He is trying to take out some illness, some disease, some tumour,
cancer, which is going to kill the man, so he has to be hard. Even if he has to fight against the
patient, he will fight and take the tumour out.
So don’t think that you are being bad or being violent to them. You are simply a surgeon and you
have to help them. Aum particularly, is a surgical group.
[The assistant group leader asks: I was just wondering whether it was right for me temperamentally,
because now I can just scream at people but I don’t feel good about it.]
No, you have some ideas that it is bad. Nothing is bad about it! It is just as if you have some idea
that it is bad to cut anybody’s body, and then you become a surgeon and your hand shakes and you
cannot hold the knife. You feel guilty about whether to do it or not. It happens in India many times.
Beloved of My Heart 30 Osho
CHAPTER 5. MAN HAS TO LIVE IN YES
Many families in India are believers of non-violence, particularly one group, the Jains. They don’t do
any violence, any sort of violence. When they go to study medicine it becomes a trouble. You have
to dissect a frog. It is impossible for a Jain to even think of it! So for many days there were no jain
doctors... impossible. Only lately, recently, a few doctors have come from that community, but they
also feel guilty. Many jain doctors have talked to me and they feel very guilty that they are creating a
hell for themselves. It is just an attitude – that this is violence, a sin. They have not killed even ants,
so how can they cut a human body? But this is just an attitude.
If you are really in deep compassion, then it is a question of saving the man. If you don’t cut the
tumour the man will die. If you cut the tumour the man will be saved. You cut the tumour out of
compassion.
This whole work is out of compassion. You are not against these people. You are not inimical to
them, so your yelling and your forcing is therapeutic. You need not get identified with it – do it as
a game. It is a game for you because they have not done anything against you. By and by you
have to learn how to yell without yelling and how to force them without forcing. It is just a game. On
the surface you are forcing them and yelling, and inside you are completely cool and collected. You
have to learn that, otherwise you will be in bad shape. I was watching the whole time, and except
for Veeresh, all the people who were participating were in bad shape (a chuckle) because it is too
heavy.
Laxmi (the secretary) reports to me again and again that when these people come out of the group
they seem to have been on a trip to hell (much laughter). It is ghost-like, completely disintegrating.
Their senses are no more working.... But you have to learn.
I was waiting for the day that you would ask and then I would tell you that you have to learn. Next
group yell, and at the same time remain quiet within. Then it will be a great meditation for you. Be
angry, show anger, and at the same time remain cool inside. Then you will see the difference. You
have learned something and you will come out of it more cool, more healthy, more collected.
[A group participant says: I enjoyed the negative part, but I held back my negativity sometimes
because I felt something wrong in it.
I feel that all the time a lot of my energy goes into fighting people, competing with people.
I won’t feel that I need love. I think that for me to love is weak. If people need my love, I refuse to
give it. I continuously felt a resistance in my body.]
No, nothing is wrong in negativity, but if you are only negative then something is wrong. One should
be balancing. Negativity is good but if you become completely negative, you will never enjoy life.
Then you can be angry but never loving. You can hate but never love. Your whole life will become
negative-oriented. You will be depressed, fighting, complaining. Nothing is wrong in that – if it fulfills
some positive role.
If anger can be used to serve love, it is beautiful. Nobody can live in negativity. You cannot make an
abode out of the negative; nobody can live in a no. Man has to live in yes. No has to be used only
to find yes.
Beloved of My Heart 31 Osho
CHAPTER 5. MAN HAS TO LIVE IN YES
For example somebody comes to you and would like to be your lover. If you go on saying no to
everybody, whosoever comes, irrelevant of the fact of who has come and knocked at your door; if
no has become your fixed answer and you have a plate saying ’no’ on the door, then you will live in
an empty negativity, suffering. It will be a hell.
’No’ will have to be used but in the service of yes. You will have to say no to nine people so that you
can remain available for the tenth. Those nine nos are serving the tenth yes. Then it is beautiful.
One cannot say yes to everybody, otherwise you will be lost; you will become fragmentary. One
cannot say yes to every passerby; one has to choose.
One has to say yes to somebody with whom one feels a deep harmony, a synchronous relationship,
a deep intimacy; with whom something starts flowing within you, with whom something resounds,
vibrates in you... whose being strikes some note within your heart and becomes a song. For that
you have to say no to many people because everybody is not a suitable partner.
You have to say no to stones because they are not food for you, but you are saying no only till the
right food comes your way. Then you can say yes, and you can say it with a full heart. But remember
man cannot live in the no. No is a means of attaining to a higher yes.
So negativity is good, but if you become simply negative, you are committing suicide. Then what is
the point of living? Say a simple no to the whole life and jump into the river! What is the point of
saying no, no, no, the whole life? Just say a big no and jump off the hill and be lost.
If you are living for some yes, then it is good. Then many times you will have to say no, but then
your no is no more negative; it is serving some positivity. Even destruction can become part of the
creative process... has to become a part. If you are making a new house, you have to demolish the
old.
One has continuously to demolish many things to create new things. Even while you are eating,
you have to demolish the food. That’s what you do when you are chewing; you destroy the food.
You destroy the whole structure of the food and then it becomes possible for your body to absorb it.
Then it becomes a creative vitality in your being.
Use destruction, negation, no, in the service of yes, creation. You felt good with the negative part
because you have trained yourself for the negative, but you have to come to the positive part also.
[A visitor says: I am very interested in learning indian music. It is something that frightens me, but I
feel that maybe I can battle with it.
When I’m really into it, it’s beautiful, but the thought of making the music frightens me.
I’ve been playing the sitar for some months now and I began to feel that I’d rather have something
smaller, and that my music would be better if people didn’t see it.
Through this group I feel that maybe I have to bring it out more.]
Your feeling is exactly right... one has to come out and one has to learn how to share. There are a
few things which grow only in sharing.
Beloved of My Heart 32 Osho
CHAPTER 5. MAN HAS TO LIVE IN YES
Music grows in sharing. If somebody is there, a sympathetic listener, then even just his presence
helps you to go deep into your effort. If you are alone, it is almost like masturbation. If you are
playing on the sitar alone, it is masturbatory. It cannot have that beauty and wholeness as when
you are making love to someone. Of course the physical release will be there, but it will only be a
release, not a fulfillment. The polar opposite is not there.
This is happening every moment. If you are playing the sitar with some people who are listening
en rapport, it is almost like a male-female relationship; two lovers meeting. The player becomes
the male and the listener becomes the female because the listener is receptivity and the player is
the active part. Then a subtle love affair happens. The energy of the player and the energy of the
listener meet and create a circle, and that circle is fulfilling.
You can learn music alone, but it has to be learned only to be played with people in relationship.
Don’t try to shrink in a corner and hide. There is no need. Life is in relationship and with people.
There is no need to be lost in a mob, but there is no need to escape either. Remain available to
people and available to your aloneness also. Let there be a rhythm: sometimes alone, sometimes
with people.
Music is an activity of relationship. The energy goes to a very high peak. Your insight has been
good... this group has done something deep in you. And start learning music.
It is scarey in a way, because music is such a great commitment that one life is not enough for it.
Indian music particularly, is a great commitment. It knows only the beginning – it doesn’t know the
end. Nobody has ever come to the end of it. People have simply started and gone on and on....
So it is scarey, death-like, and one becomes lost in it more and more. It is not an ego trip. That is
the difference between indian music and the modern music. Modern music is very much of the ego.
The musician, the player, is just enjoying his ego.
Indian music is totally different. One has to annihilate oneself completely so that one becomes just
an instrument in the hands of God and He plays. You become just a passage, a vehicle, a hollow
bamboo flute.
[About the music group Osho has said that the music group provides, like the growth groups and
the milieu of the ashram, an opportunity for the individual ego to drop and merge with a group
consciousness... ]
Once you know how to dissolve yourself, once you are not there, you will simply be surprised,
mystified, amazed, that somehow the whole group is moving spontaneously.
Then you will feel an expansion of consciousness because you are not there as an individual.
You have joined together with a collectivity. No more islands... everybody has melted. And then
the whole thing becomes intuitive. You are joined by a telepathic chord which surrounds you like
a climate, touches you all, plays on your hearts, together. That climate takes over and you are
possessed.
Beloved of My Heart 33 Osho
CHAPTER 6
Self-Improvement is a Way to Hell
8 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
[A sannyasin said that she did not have much time left over in her daily life for enjoyment...
Osho suggested that she make it a point each morning to do a forty minute meditation which involves
simply sitting and looking.... ]
You can sit anywhere, but whatsoever you are looking at should not be too exciting. For example
things should not be moving too much. They become a distraction. You can watch the trees – that
is not a problem because they are not moving and the scene remains constant. You can watch the
sky or just sit in the corner watching the wall.
The second thing is, don’t look at anything in particular... just emptiness because the eyes are there
and one has to look at something, but you are not looking at anything in particular. Don’t focus or
concentrate on anything... just a diffuse image. That relaxes very much.
And the third thing, relax your breathing. Don’t do it, let it happen. Let it be natural and that will relax
even more.
The fourth thing is, let your body remain as immobile as possible. First find a good posture – you can
sit on a pillow or mattress or whatsoever you feel, but once you settle, remain immobile, because
if the body does not move, the mind automatically falls silent. In a moving body, the mind also
continues to move, because body-mind are not two things. They are one... it is one energy.
In the beginning it will seem a little difficult but after a few days you will enjoy it tremendously. You
will see, by and by, layer upon layer of the mind starting to drop. A moment comes when you are
simply there and no mind.
34
CHAPTER 6. SELF-IMPROVEMENT IS A WAY TO HELL
Much is going to happen.
[A sannyasin, present tonight with her six-year-old sannyasin son, said that she was aware that she
was continually creating problems but that she did not know how to let go of it.
Osho said she seemed to be worrying about worrying and that let-go didn’t mean no problems, but
going with the problems if they arose. He said God must have some purpose in having her create
problems, and that each problem helps growth and imparts something to one’s being. He said all
shoulds should be dropped, and that she should accept that she was creating problems without
needing to be concerned with why.... ]
There is no need to improve yourself. All self-improvement is a way to hell. All efforts to make
something, somebody out of yourself, something of an ideal, are going to create more and more
madness. Ideals are the base of all madness, and the whole humanity is neurotic because of too
many ideals.
Animals are not neurotic because they don’t have any ideals. Trees are not neurotic because they
don’t have any ideals. They are not trying to become somebody else. They are simply enjoying
whatsoever they are.
So you are you. But somewhere deep down you want to become a Buddha or a Jesus, and then you
go round in a circle which will be non-ending. Just see the point of it – you are you. And the whole,
or God, wants you to be you. That’s why He has created you, otherwise He would have created you
a better model. He wanted you to be here at this moment. He did not want Jesus to be here in place
of you. And He knows better. The whole always knows better than the part.
So just accept yourself. If you can accept yourself, you have learned the greatest secret of life, and
then everything comes on its own. Just be yourself. There is no need to pull yourself up. There is
no need to be a different height other than you are already.
There is no need to have another face. Simply be as you are, and in deep acceptance of it, flowering
happens and you go on becoming more and more yourself.
This is what I call let-go. Let-go is not an effort that you can do. It is an understanding that I am I and
others are others, and that it is pointless to try to become somebody else other than who I am. That
creates a tension in the mind; that creates worry. Once you drop the idea of becoming somebody,
there is no tension. Suddenly all tension disappears. You are here, luminous, in this moment. And
there is nothing else to do than to celebrate and enjoy.
So all people who are in some way trying to improve themselves and are reading foolish people like
Vincent Peale and Dale Carnegie, are basically neurotic. A healthy person simply accepts. He’s
more like an animal, like a tree, like a mountain, than the so-called human being. He simply says,
’Here I am... this is the way I am.’ He does not hide – there is nothing to hide. He does not try to
pull himself in some other direction. He simply floats.
That is what let-go is. It is an understanding, not an effort. If problems are coming, they must be
needed. Let them come!
Beloved of My Heart 35 Osho
CHAPTER 6. SELF-IMPROVEMENT IS A WAY TO HELL
[The Hypnotherapy group is present at darshan. Osho recently talked about how hypnotherapy
works, saying: Hypnotherapy touches the fourth body, the body of consciousness. It simply puts
a suggestion into your mind. Call it animal magnetism, mesmerism, or whatsoever you like, but
it works through the power of thought, not the power of matter. If your consciousness accepts a
certain idea, it starts functioning.
Hypnotherapy has a great future. It is going to become the future medicine because if just by
changing your thought pattern your mind can be changed, through your mind the vital body, and
through the vital body your gross body, then why bother with poisons, gross medicine? Why not
work it through thought-power?
A group participant says: I ran into a tension that I didn ’t even know I had, and it really helped me.
Thank you.
Osho recommends he does the Aum group.]
... then do Aum. It is just the opposite.
It is good to swing from one polarity to the other so that you can feel how liquid you can be. In the
Aum marathon the emphasis is to be on allowing it, rather than doing it. To the western mind doing
comes very easy. Allowing comes with difficulty because we have been trained to do things. Even
things which cannot be done, we have been taught to do. Love your mother – as if love is something
that one can do. Respect the priest – as if respect is something that can be done.
Children learn by and by how to pretend. They cannot respect because respect is something which
happens, if it happens. If in the close vicinity of some person it arises, it arises. If love happens, it
happens; there is no way to bring it in. But if the child is forced continuously to do, then he starts
pretending. He pretends that he is respecting, and then his whole being goes pseudo. There are
people who go on pretending for their whole life and they have completely forgotten that they are
pretending. It has been so long that they have become completely oblivious.
The whole emphasis is of allowing things to happen to you. So the basic effort is not positive but
negative. The basic effort is not to debar them, not to prevent them by any effort. Just remain
receptive and open. Wherever the energy is moving, you go with it, unafraid, fearless.
The greater is the venture, the greater is the pay-off. The more you go with the energy wherever it
leads, the more you become capable of coming back home, thrilled with new energy, because for
the first time the constant pressure of doing, dissolves. And you start floating – not even swimming.
You start floating in the stream and the stream takes you over, and takes you to the farthest sea.
You simply go with it. No effort is needed of your own.
[A sannyasin says she is very confused. She has been trying to let-go and accepting her problems
but: then I did the Encounter group and everything got muddled up.]
I cannot see how things can get muddled up. You must be having some idea of how things should
be, so you always judge according to that idea.
Beloved of My Heart 36 Osho
CHAPTER 6. SELF-IMPROVEMENT IS A WAY TO HELL
For example if I have a certain idea that this chair (Osho indicates the armchair he always sits on)
has to be here and then don’t find it here but in that corner, everything is muddled up. If I have
a certain idea of how things should be and they are not that way, then things are muddled up. In
fact your idea is the problem. If you have fixed ideas, life is going to create much confusion for you
because life never believes in your ideas. It goes on muddling things. It goes on meddling with
people. It goes on playing tricks. It is not like a drawingroom in which you fix your furniture and it
remains the same.
Life is not a drawingroom. It is a very wild phenomenon.
So if you have a certain idea that this should be like this, then you are asking for trouble. Your should
is creating the trouble. Never say that life is creating trouble or that anybody else is creating trouble.
It is your should. Drop the should and then there is no problem.
Once you don’t ask how life should be, whatsoever it is is perfectly beautiful because you don’t have
any criterion to judge it against. Encounter muddled you because you have certain ideas about what
should happen... expectations. And if life is not moving that way, something is wrong. Nothing is
going wrong! Life is going on its own, on,!y you have some fixed ideas. So drop those fixed ideas.
Life is never going to follow you... you have to follow life. So if it is muddled, be muddled. What can
you do?
And God is very chaotic. He is not an engineer or an architect, a scientist or a mathematician. He is
a dreamer, and in a world of dreams, everything is muddled up.
Your boyfriend suddenly becomes a horse.... In a dream you never argue and never say ’What has
happened? Just a moment before you were my boyfriend and now you have become a horse!’ You
never say anything. In a dream, you accept. Not even a suspicion about what is happening arises
because in a dream you don’t carry your idea. Even that is perfect – a boyfriend turning into a horse.
Perfectly good! Accept it.
But while you are awake it will be impossible for you to see that your boyfriend is turning into a
horse. And boyfriends many times turn into horses (laughter). The face may remain the same but
the energy becomes different. Then you feel confused.
I have never really come across any person who is confused. Rather I come across people who
have fixed ideas. The more fixed the idea, the more confusion there will be.
If you want to be non-confused, drop the idea; not that confusion will change, but it will not look like
confusion at all. It is your interpretation. It is just life, alive.
This is the trick of the mind – that it will say, ’Drop all this confusion! Settle down to some unconfused
state. What has happened?’ I am saying just the opposite. If there is confusion, find out what is
giving you the idea of confusion, and drop it.
Confusion is perfectly okay. Nothing is wrong in it. Life is not like a railroad – just trains moving on
the same track, shunting here and there, but always on the same track. Life is not like that. Logic is
like that, like a railroad, trains always moving on the same track. Life is more riverlike. It moves and
Beloved of My Heart 37 Osho
CHAPTER 6. SELF-IMPROVEMENT IS A WAY TO HELL
creates its own path and then it changes also. It moves through whims. Life is whimsical, romantic,
not mathematical – and that’s why it is beautiful.
Just think – if there is nothing like confusion and everything is mathematically exact, and life is like
a railway timetable, you will simply be bored to death. What will you do? Just look in the time-table
and everything is known!
Allow the wildness of life to be there, and if by and by you have to drop something, drop your fixed
ideas. Then you will be able to enjoy confusion more. And it will not be confusing... it will be creative
chaos. A man needs a creative chaos in the heart to give birth to dancing stars. There is no other
way. So just reconsider it, mm?
[A sannyasin says: Sometimes I realise that I think my relationship with you is not... that it is just
imagination.]
But have you known any relationship which was not imagination?
[The sannyasin answers: I guess not.]
That’s a very good realisation.
All relationship is imagination because whenever you are going out of yourself, you go only through
the door of imagination. There is no other door. The friend, the enemy, both are your imagination.
When you stop imagination completely, you are alone, absolutely alone.
That’s my whole effort here – to make you so alone and so contented with yourself that there is no
need to relate, and if you want to relate you enjoy it just like a game. It is a game of imagination –
nothing is wrong in it. There is no need to be afraid of it. You can enjoy it. You can be very creative
about it.
Once you understand that life and all of its relationships are imagination you don’t go against life,
but your understanding helps you to make your life relationship more rich. Now you know that
relationships are imagination, why not put more imagination into them? Why not enjoy them as
deeply as possible? When the flower is nothing but your imagination, why not create a beautiful
flower? Why settle for an ordinary flower? Let the flower be of emeralds and diamonds.
Whatsoever you imagine, let it be that. Imagination is not a sin, it is a capacity. It is a bridge. Just
as you cross a river and you make a bridge between this shore and that, so imagination functions
between two persons.
Two beings project a bridge – call it love, call it trust – but it is imagination. Imagination is the
only creative faculty in man, so whatsoever is creative is going to be imagination. Enjoy it and
make it more and more beautiful. By and by you will come to a point where you don’t depend on
relationships. You share. If you ha e something, you share with people, but you are contended as
you are.
All love is imagination, But remember when I use the word imagination, I don’t use it in the
condemnatory sense that it is ordinarily used. Imagination is the divine faculty of man. In fact in
Beloved of My Heart 38 Osho
CHAPTER 6. SELF-IMPROVEMENT IS A WAY TO HELL
India, we say that the world is God’s imagination. Right! God is dreaming you sitting there. God is
dreaming me talking to you. We are part in the divine mind of the whole. He is imagining.
Hindus say that God has a twenty-four hour day, like us, but his hours are very very long... millions
of years. He is awake for twelve hours and then the world disappears. The day of God is the end
of the world. For twelve hours He sleeps and then the world appears because He starts dreaming,
and dreaming fantastic dreams of stars and sun and moon and people and heaven and hell.
When He is asleep He projects His dreams – and this is the creation. When in the morning He
awakes, the dream disappears. This is de-creation. In English there is no word for it. When He
wakes up, we disappear. Hindus call it pralaya. Everything disappears and He goes to sleep again
and starts dreaming and the whole world appears.
So imagination is the divine faculty – enjoy it. You have come to a good insight.
[The sannyasin adds: I find that most of my problems and most of my complaints about life, come
because I had to leave the quiet warm place I used to have inside myself where I could go and could
understand myself.]
Everybody has to leave that place because that is the only way to reclaim it. If you had lived in the
same place you would not have known it. To know something, one has to lose it.
Everybody goes astray from his inner world, the inner space, and then by and by one feels starved,
hungry for it. An appetite arises, a thirst is felt. The call comes from the innermost self to come back
home and one starts travelling. That’s what sannyas is.
It is going to the warm inner space that you left some day. You will not be gaining something new.
You will be gaining something that was always there, but still it will be a gain because now for the
first time, you will see what it is.
The last time you were in that space, you were oblivious of it. One cannot be aware of something if
one has not left it. So that was good... everything is good. Going astray is also good.
To sin is also good because that is the only way to become a saint.
[A sannyasin says: Sometimes I’m so confused. I ask myself if I need sannyas or perhaps a friend
or a girlfriend or such things.]
But sannyasin is not against girlfriends. You can have girlfriends and sannyas too! My sannyas is
bigger than girlfriends. It is not worried about them at all. You can have girlfriends – one, two, or as
many as you feel...(laughter) and still you remain a sannyasin. My sannyas is very bold... it is not
cowardly.
[The sannyasin adds: Sometimes I don’t like the orange clothes and the mala... ]
Then you have a cowardly concept of sannyas. What can I do? You have a wrong notion about
sannyas. You think sannyas is something life-negating, that sannyas is something against love. You
don’t understand my concept of sannyas.
Beloved of My Heart 39 Osho
CHAPTER 6. SELF-IMPROVEMENT IS A WAY TO HELL
It is a very revolutionary concept. It is life-accepting. It is not a renunciation... it is a celebration.
But if you feel difficulty, and if you think that it is impossible for you to be both a sannyasin and a
lover, I will take sannyas back because I will not put my sannyas against anybody’s love – never.
Drop sannyas and be a lover. But it is you who is doing it; I am not insisting for it. I am saying that
my sannyas is inclusive, very inclusive; it includes everything.
But if you feel some guilt, that is your problem. Sannyas is not the problem, but guilt. If you have
some guilty feelings, if you think that love is something dirty, how can you love while you are in an
ochre robe? While you are a sannyasin? How can you love? Such a dirty thing! – then you have
very wrong notions about love. You will never be able to love because how can one move deeply in
a dirty thing? You are going to be doomed.
Love is one of the most pure things in the world... the holiest of holies.
I don’t see that there is any problem... no problem at all. Find a girlfriend, and if you cannot, seek
my help!
[Another group participant says: I am dreaming most of the time. But I don’t know if that dreaming
is connected with reality, or if perhaps it too is just part of imagination and dreaming.]
Dream is as real as any other reality. Dream is part of reality. We always create a dichotomy in our
minds of good and bad, the real and unreal, of God and devil. We continuously create a dichotomy,
and then of course we are caught in it, and it becomes a dilemma.
Dream is part of reality as much as reality is part of dream. They are not two separate things. So
don’t create unnecessary problems... accept. It is good. Dream good dreams, and dream with more
alertness, more awareness. Have a little more watchfulness and then you will be able to enjoy both.
You can enjoy the whole movie of the mind. So many beautiful pictures move on the screen and you
can just watch. No movie can be so dramatic or so intriguing – but you have to become a spectator
also.
And this is a great art because in the dream you are everything: the actor, the story writer, the
playback singer, the projector, the hall, the audience, the screen, the projected film. You are
everything and you are doing all sorts of things alone.
So just one thing has to be remembered – to be a witness to all that is happening to you and enjoy
it. A great drama is being enacted within you. Don’t try to fight or to be against it; don’t condemn it
as being a dream.
If you don’t condemn, by and by the dream will start disappearing. One day comes when the
witness is left alone, all dreaming gone, all actors disappear, the projector and the film and the
screen, and the theatre; everything gone. One is simply sitting alone in tremendous silence, in a
great nowhereness, in nothingness....
Don’t long for it, otherwise it will not come! Just try to understand the dreams. Watch them, witness;
don’t fight – and then that day will come on its own. If you hope for it, you have already lost your
witnessing....
Beloved of My Heart 40 Osho
CHAPTER 6. SELF-IMPROVEMENT IS A WAY TO HELL
Then just enjoy whatsoever is happening right now. The group has been good!
Beloved of My Heart 41 Osho
CHAPTER 7
The First Door is Acceptance
9 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
[A sannyasin says: I’ve got piles. I want to die sometimes... Sometimes I’m so high and singing, and
all of a sudden, zoom! I would welcome death.]
It is alright, but you are not finished yet! Death is perfectly alright, there is nothing wrong in it, but
right now you are not finished. So the very idea of death will make you unnecessarily gloomy. You
are asking for a premature death.
So these things are not to be asked. They are to be left to existence. When they happen, they
happen. That’s when you accept – whenever it happens, it is a great rest. And when your body
is completely spent, death is the only thing needed. Then it happens; then you move into another
body. You may become a tree or a bird or a tiger or something, and you go on moving. The existence
gives you a new body when the old is spent.
Nothing is wrong in death. Death is beautiful, but never ask for it, because when you ask for it the
quality of death changes towards suicide. Then it is no more a natural death. You may not commit
suicide, but the very asking makes you suicidal. When alive, be alive; when dead, be dead. But
don’t overlap things. There are people who are dying and who go on clinging with life. That too is
wrong because when death has come, you have to go... and you have to go dancing. If you are
asking for death, even thinking about it, then you are alive and clinging to the idea of death. It is the
same in the reverse direction.
Somebody is dying and goes on clinging to life, does not want to die. Somebody is alive and wants
to die. That is non-acceptance.
42
CHAPTER 7. THE FIRST DOOR IS ACCEPTANCE
Accept whatsoever is there, and once you accept unconditionally, then everything is beautiful. Even
pain has a purifying effect. Even piles are divine.
So whatsoever comes on your way, just be thankful. God knows better and if He gives piles, perfectly
okay! One has to be thankful. One has to live through all sorts of experiences – pleasant and painful,
sweet and bitter.
[Osho said that to be swinging from one pole to another – from highs to lows – simply indicated an
aliveness, and that both experiences were ’gifts from the same hand’. He said that if one held back
from unpleasant or negative experiences, one could not be fully into the positive.]
But we have been taught to choose – to choose between the two – so our minds are completely
poisoned. We go on choosing, while life is a choiceless thing. It does not depend on your choice
– it simply goes on happening. Whether you choose or not, you create your choice by your own
miseries – which are unnecessary.
One should simply be ready to accept whatsoever comes – sometimes the enemy, sometimes the
friend. Both are your guests and both have to be respected. From this very moment start respecting
your piles and they will disappear sooner or later. Respect and treat them as friends, as guests, not
enemies. Just drop that concept of fighting with them. That antagonism has to be dropped.
Pain is there, I know. Suffering is there, I know. Suffer, and just accept. Don’t ask for death. When it
comes, it comes. One should simply go on enjoying whatsoever comes on the way. Non-asking will
give you a state of non-desire. Not complaining will make you more contented.
This moment is all. Never go beyond this moment, but whatsoever happens, be true to it. Be
authentic to it.
With the body, with age, many illnesses enter. They are natural. They can be very great opportunities
to grow – and they are meant for that. They are not purposeless... nothing is. The purpose is that
you can accept the pain also. One who can accept pain becomes incapable of being unhappy. To
be happy is not much. It is happening – sometimes you become happy; everybody sometimes feels
happy. But to become incapable of unhappiness... that is the goal of all spiritual effort.
And this comes through understanding – that you accept pain also with no complaint. Just see the
point: if there is no complaint, the pain is not like pain; almost ninety percent of it has disappeared.
It was your interpretation. By and by a distance comes between you and the pain. It goes far away.
One mohammedan mystic, Abraham, used to pray to God every day, saying, ’I don’t ask for
pleasures and I don’t ask for happiness, but always give me a little pain. Always continue to give me
a few gifts of suffering.’
He was staying with another mystic, and the friend heard Abraham praying. He said ’What nonsense
are you asking? You know God is compassionate’ – Mohammedans call God, Rahim – and He is
so compassionate, that if you ask He will give! What are you asking?’
Abraham said, ’Because I came to God through my pain, through my suffering, and because when
I am happy I tend to forget Him, I ask for a little pain. When I am in pain I remember God. When I
am happy, I tend to forget.’ He was saying a great spiritual truth.
Beloved of My Heart 43 Osho
CHAPTER 7. THE FIRST DOOR IS ACCEPTANCE
No need to even ask, I say to you. If Abraham had been here, I would have told him, no need to
ask. Because whatsoever you ask – even if you ask for suffering – you are asking for something
pleasurable. Maybe in suffering you remember God and that’s your pleasure. So man cannot ask for
suffering. Whatsoever he asks, even if he asks for suffering, his innermost desire will be of pleasure.
So even if you ask for death, you are asking for a better life. You say this life is worthless, these
piles and this age, and the body is becoming old so now take it away. You are simply saying that you
would like those things not to be there or that you don’t want to be with these things. But either way
you are showing a discontent. Just accept that whatsoever is, is, and by and by you will see things
are changing. A very subtle change happens.
Once you have become capable of accepting pain as a guest, you become incapable of pain. Pain
comes but it cannot be painful to you. It comes, but somehow it misses the mark. It does not hit you
hard – it cannot – because by and by you become unavailable to it. You rise higher and higher. It
moves around but cannot penetrate to the centre and a distance arises.
So this is what I would like to say to you – just accept it and then see what happens.
[Tathata is a twenty-two hour group. The idea behind it is that unless we can accept ourselves
unconditionally, we cannot flow – with ourselves and with others.]
’Tathata’ means suchness. It means to be with the fact, without any evaluation for or against. If you
are angry, then be angry and don’t judge that it is good or bad. If you can allow anger without any
judgement on your part, you will feel a deep freedom coming out of it. It will be released and a great
tension will go with it. It is the same with all emotions.
Repression has not to be allowed. Expression has not to be forced. This is what the word suchness,
’tathata’, means.
[The group leader says it was: A tremendous experience for me. We worked very heavily with
body-work into fears.]
Very good. The basic work is the body-work – that has to be remembered. People have to be
brought back to their bodies. They have moved too far into their heads. They have lost all grounding
in their body. They are just hovering like ghosts around their bodies; they are no more in them.
Christianity and other religions also, more or less, have done something very dangerous. They
have created a rift between the body and consciousness. They have created almost an enmity,
an antagonism – as if the body has to be crushed and destroyed, as if the body is the foe, as
if the body is the bondage or the cause of bondage. By and by, through thousands of years of
conditioning, people have become completely uprooted from their bodies. They are just like ghosts
in the machines.
The very basic work in these growth groups is to bring them back to their bodies, to bring them back
to their senses. They have to be pulled down from their heads and spread all over the body. Once
they are in the body, everything becomes possible because they become alive and sensitive. Once
they start feeling their energy, their body energy, they are no more Christian, Hindu, Mohammedans.
Beloved of My Heart 44 Osho
CHAPTER 7. THE FIRST DOOR IS ACCEPTANCE
They are simply human beings. They become part of the animal world to which they belong... to the
trees, to the animals, to the birds. They become vital, alive, and then everything becomes possible.
Work hard and break through all their barriers. They will resist, they will resist hard, because you are
bringing them back to something which they have been avoiding their whole lives. For their whole
life they have been thinking in terms of their being superior, higher, holier than the body. For their
whole life they have been shrinking away from the body. They have forgotten the way to come back.
The roots have become shrunken, many blocks have developed. Passages are blocked and much
has become frozen.
When you work on people’s bodies, you are moving in a dangerous territory because you can touch
points where they are hiding many poisons. If a certain man has been repressing his anger, then in
certain parts of his body that anger is there, layer upon layer like a coiled poisonous snake. When
you touch that part the anger will recoil and the man can become ferocious. He can almost become
murderous. But this has to be done; only then can he be in a state of unwinding. By and by he will
relax.
One thing more you have to remember in the body-work is that you come easily into your own body
if you relate with other bodies. That’s why in all societies, touching, hugging, kissing, is prohibited;
it is not generally allowed. You don’t see people on the street hugging each other, kissing each
other, holding hands; only in their privacy, and that too, with a few particular persons – a spouse, a
husband, a wife, a friend. People have completely forgotten that you cannot be in your body if you
don’t allow the warm atmosphere of other bodies to enter you.
When you hold somebody’s hand lovingly, suddenly your hand becomes alive because you have
to move your energy into your hand to touch the other person. So touching, hugging, kissing,
embracing each other, has to be encouraged. Then people come back easily to their bodies. The
warmth spreads and the lava of their life starts flowing .
Much body touch is going to be of great help, otherwise people are just holding their bodies away.
Even if they are touching each other, they don’t touch from the inside. They may be rubbing bodies
against each other, but that is not touch. It is touch only when warmth starts flowing, when the touch
is no more just a physical touch but takes on the quality of love. So body-work and body relating –
relating not from the mind, mm? Otherwise people relate only in one way – talking.
Very good... I feel it has been good.
[A sannyasin asks: I see when I smile sometimes that it is a contradiction to what I am feeling and I
continue to smile but I feel bad.
On the other hand, when I’m happy and I don’t smile, I feel my happiness only comes from here
(indicating throat).]
Mm mm, it is possible. It is so with many people, because the society has created a division in
you – in everybody. The society expects you to be smiling even in a situation where a smile is
not possible. It becomes a social mannerism. A few people learn smiling so much that they forget
whether anything is coming from their being or not. They simply go on smiling like a formality and the
Beloved of My Heart 45 Osho
CHAPTER 7. THE FIRST DOOR IS ACCEPTANCE
inner synchronisity is broken. Sometimes you are feeling unhappy but the smile keeps on coming.
It is a misalignment, as if you are functioning like two persons.
So for one month, do one thing: become more aware. Only smile when you feel like smiling,
otherwise don’t. Even if you feel that it is going against your character, against your routine, for
one month, just whenever you catch yourself smiling and there is no inner need to smile, drop it in
the middle. Even if it looks a little awkward and the other person thinks that you are a little odd, don’t
be worried.
After one month, tell me how you feel. It will be difficult because smiling has such a good pay-off.
When you smile at people, even if you don’t mean it, people feel good, and when they feel good they
make you feel good. When you smile at somebody he feels that you are so happy to see him – and
you are simply smiling a bogus smile. It has nothing to do with him! But he feels good and when he
feels good, he smiles. He says beautiful things to you, that you are a beautiful person and you feel
good, and so it goes on.
If you stop smiling your false smiles, you will feel that strange things are happening. People are
not so friendly towards you. You become a misfit in groups; people want to avoid you. Accept that
too. For one month, whatsoever the cost, smile only when you feel like smiling. This will bring an
alignment. And after one month I will see, mm? Good!
[The group co-leader said that he found it strange to be pushing people into areas where he felt he
needed to go, or seeing blocks in them which were also in him.
Osho said that one could learn best through teaching, and that he should regard the role of
groupleader as just being a role, and that of participant just another; that they were both just part of
the game – the game of therapy. The thing is to play your part as perfectly as you can.
Osho said that there are two types of knowledge – scientific and religious. In the scientific, one
remains outside the experiment, otherwise one becomes prejudiced.... ]
This is one way – easier. The other way is of religion.
Exactly the opposite is the rule: you have to become a participant, involved, completely drowned in
it. So when it is your problem it is a religious situation. When it is somebody else’s problem it is a
scientific situation. It is very easy to be scientific. It is very difficult to be religious. because you have
to be both the experimented and the experimenter, both the experiment and the scientist. There is
no separation inside. You are playing a mono-drama. In an ordinary drama there are many actors
and roles are divided. In a mono-drama you are alone. All the roles have to be played by you.
A zen monk used to call out loudly every morning, ’Bokuju, where are you?’ That was his own name
(laughter). And he would answer, ’Yes sir? I am here.’
Then he would say, ’Bokuju, remember, another day is given. Be aware and alert and don’t be
foolish!’ He would then say, ’Yes sir, I will try my best.’ And there was nobody else there!
His disciples started thinking he had gone mad or something. But he was playing a mono-drama.
And that’s how the inner situation is. You are the talker, you are the listener, you are the commander
Beloved of My Heart 46 Osho
CHAPTER 7. THE FIRST DOOR IS ACCEPTANCE
and you are the commanded. It is difficult because roles tend to get mixed, to overlap. It is very easy
when somebody else is the led and you are the leader. If the roles are divided, things are clear-cut.
Nothing is overlapping; you have to finish your role, he has to finish his. It is easy; the situation is
arbitrary.
When you are both, the situation is natural, not arbitrary, and of course it is more complicated. But
you will learn by and by.
This has been a very good insight. And always remember that a growth group is not an analysis.
It is not to be an analysis – it has to be an insight. It is not that you think about and you analyse
and categorise, that you conceptualise and theorise – no. You just live in the whole situation and an
insight arises in you. This is an in-sight to see that you are telling a person to do something which
you need yourself.
This will make you humble and you will not get into any ego-trip of being a leader. Otherwise you
may be helpful to others, but you will create a great disease for yourself. So the leader is in danger.
He is playing with fire. He may get into the ego-trip too much of ’I am the leader and I am helping
so many people. Look how many people are flowering. This is my work’. Then you miss the insight.
You may have helped others but you are drowned.
Then you remain ill. Your medicine may be working for others but it doesn’t work for you. This
is an insight – ’I am in the same boat; my problem is the same.’ It makes you more human, more
understanding, more tender, soft ... great compassion arises in you. Then you are not condemnatory
if the led is not following you. You know how difficult it is. You cannot follow yourself.
Good, mm? It has been good.
[Another group participant says: I ’m starting to accept myself. My heart is pumping. In the group
also, it was pumping. I start to like it (laughter).]
(chuckling) Good. If you can start to like yourself and to accept yourself, much becomes available.
Many doors open – but the first door is always of acceptance. If you condemn yourself, everything
remains closed because you have not even opened the first door.
Every child is brought up in condemnation. Every child is told that he is not accepted as he is. If
you do certain things that your elders want you to do, you are good. If you go against them, you are
bad. So your actions decide whether you will be loved or not, not your being.
A child by and by starts learning that ’I am not valuable in myself. I have no intrinsic value. If I do
certain things that elders think are good, then I am accepted. I am a good boy or a good girl. If I don’t
do that and I follow my own instincts and it goes against the elders, I am bad, and I will not receive
any love from them.’ And in a very dangerous world, a small child is so helpless, so tremendously
helpless, that he has to compromise. He feels hurt that he is not accepted for himself as he is.
He feels ’Great demands are being made upon me which are foolish and the elders go on saying
very strange things. They say ”It is because we love you, that’s why we want to do this. Because we
love you, that’s why we want to beat you. Because we love you, that’s why we try to discipline you.
It is all for your own sake. It is all for your own good.”’
Beloved of My Heart 47 Osho
CHAPTER 7. THE FIRST DOOR IS ACCEPTANCE
And the child cannot say anything. He cannot rebel and he cannot revolt because he is helpless.
His whole survival is at stake. For his survival he accepts compromises, becomes diplomatic, tries
to do things others are saying to do; at least, pretends to. He tries not to do things which he wants
to do, or at least tries to hide that he has been doing them.
A great dichotomy arises. Then you are always condemning; something or other is always wrong.
This is your parental voice, society, educationists. Their voice is working inside you and they’ are
continuously condemning you, making you feel guilty. They have crippled all humanity.
If you start accepting yourself you have taken the first step against this insane society. You have
taken the first step towards being a new human being. You have laid the first brick for a different
type of humanity, which will be accepting, loving. Everybody should be valued for his own sake. The
value should be intrinsic, not for what he does. His very existence is valuable.
Accept yourself and drop those parental voices by and by. The more you get rid of them, the more
free and alive you will feel... more spontaneous.
[Another group participant says: Everybody says I have blocks and I can’t recognise them so I can’t
bring them up. I don’t feel any blocks but the groupleader thinks I have. I think he’s crazy.
Osho checks his energy.]
He is not wrong – blocks are there. He may be crazy but he is right... and sometimes crazy people
are right (laughter).
Blocks are there, but they are very dead so you cannot feel them. Blocks have many qualities. If the
block is not absolutely settled, then you can feel it. It is loose and something is still flowing around,
so you can feel it. But if the block is completely dead and it has become settled for many years, you
cannot feel it. You have accepted it as part of your body, just as you accept your bones so you don’t
feel them. They are there.
Good (laughter). Then you will start feeling the block also. Just wait... and don’t be worried about it
because it has nothing to do with your worrying. You cannot bring it in this way.
[The sannyasin adds: About a week or so ago, I had a satori experience and I climbed on the bull’s
back for a short time.
He has a slippery back. How can I stay on the back of the bull? – it was at a party.
Good. It will come again.
And don’t be worried, one slips many times. The bull is difficult and slippery also. You will slip many
times, but by and by one becomes more skilful.
Many times the glances of satori come but you cannot hold them. But nothing is wrong in it and
don’t be worried that you could not hold it for longer. Forget all about it. Just remember the situation
in which it happened and try to move in that situation again and again.
Beloved of My Heart 48 Osho
CHAPTER 7. THE FIRST DOOR IS ACCEPTANCE
The experience is not important. How you were feeling just a moment before, that is important. If
you can create that situation again, the experience will happen again. Experience is not important.
The situation is important; how you were feeling – flowing. Loving... what the situation was. Music
may have been on, people were dancing, eating... the flavour of food, or some beautiful woman just
by your side, a friend talking to you – and suddenly....
Just remember the aroma in which it happened, the field. Try to create that field. When the field is
right and you are in tune again, the bull will enter and you can ride on him...
One day one has to. Just sit silently and try to create that situation again, because it is a field that
you can create. Sometimes it happens accidently.
The whole science of Yoga developed out of accidents. For the first time people were not looking
for satori, because how could they know it then? For the first time it happened in a certain situation
and they became aware. They started seeking it, searching for methods to reach it. Naturally they
became aware that if the situation can be created again, maybe the experience will follow. This is
how, by trial and error, the whole science of Yoga, Tantra, and Zen, developed. It took centuries to
develop it.
For example many people became aware that if you sit silently and the body is not moving at all, the
bull enters very easily. So people have been sitting silently, unmoving. People became aware that
when the breathing is so silent that it is almost stopped, suddenly it happens. They became aware
that if you sit with eyes fully open, it is difficult. If you sit with eyes fully closed, it is difficult, because
when you sit with eyes fully closed, the moment you become silent you become sleepy. The bull
may come but you will be asleep so you will miss the opportunity. If you have open eyes the world
comes inside too much so you are distracted too much. People started looking just at the tip of the
nose, with eyes neither open or closed, just half-way. Just looking at the tip of the nose, you cannot
fall asleep and the world cannot enter in so much, and then it can happen more easily.
People became aware that if you stand you get tired soon. You cannot remain in that state for long;
your body starts swaying. It is difficult to remain immobile while standing because the standing
posture is for walking. If you lie down you fall asleep, because the lying posture is for sleep. So they
started sitting erect.
This is the padmasan, the lotus posture, in which you are sitting. In this posture you can stay longer
than you can standing and you can remain awake more easily than when you are lying down. This
is a very symetrical posture. The body is just in the middle, the backbone is erect and the whole
body is loosely hanging on it. Both the hands, the palms, are touching each other. Feet upon feet.
They make a circle, and the body electricity moves in a circle. That creates a harmony and in that
harmony, satori happens easily.
These are just situations. They are not necessary situations. It is not that if you can sit it has to
happen. No, this is simply creating a more flexible state in which it can happen, but there is no
necessity. A person can sit for his whole life and it may not happen.
Everybody has to find in what situation his satori starts bubbling, his own samadhi starts happening.
Everybody has to feel his own way. If you are a little alert, after a few experiences you will become
able to create the situation, mm?
Beloved of My Heart 49 Osho
CHAPTER 8
If You Love Me, You are Caught!
10 May 1976 pm in Chuang Tzu Auditorium
If you understand me rightly, never ask my advice for details, because that can become a problem for
you. You follow me? Just remain alive and spontaneous and full of feeling. Wherever your sunflower
says the sun is, allow the feeling that way. And never listen to any other consideration.
This is courage... and this is authenticity. Authenticity is one of the greatest values in life. Nothing
can be compared to it.
In the old terminology, authenticity is also called truth. The new terminology calls it authenticity
– which is better than truth, because when we talk about truth, it seems as if truth is something, a
thing-like phenomenon somewhere and you have to find it. Truth looks more like a noun. Authenticity
is a verb. It is not something waiting for you. You have to be authentic, only then is it there. You
cannot discover it. You have to create it continuously by being true. It is a dynamic process.
Let this sink into you as deeply as possible, that all that is beautiful in life is a verb; it is not a noun.
Truth, to be true about it, is a verb; it is not a noun. Language is fallacious. Love is not a noun; it is
a verb. Love is in loving. It is a process.
When you love, only then love is there. When you don’t love, it has disappeared. It exists precisely
when it is dynamic. Trust is a verb, not a noun. When you trust, it is there. Trust means trusting and
love means loving. Truth means being truthful.
And the criterion is within you – not in bibles, not in the koran, not in the gita. The criterion is in
your feeling, your existential feeling. So whatsoever the feeling says, you move with it. Sometimes
50
CHAPTER 8. IF YOU LOVE ME, YOU ARE CAUGHT!
it gives you great insecurity. Say okay to that. Sometimes it leads you into deep pain; say okay to
that. Trust that wherever it is leading must be meaningful and significant to your growth.
Thought is very cunning, crude, clever, calculating. Of course it gives more comfortable ideas, more
convenient. It always considers everything else except the feeling. But it is dead.
So go there, and just be without any ideas. If you feel like staying there and helping them, help
them. If you feel like going north, go north. Or there may be some third alternative – who knows?
All that we can see is very small compared to that which really happens. Nobody knows. Life is
unpredictable.
Remain available to the moment. Never decide beforehand, so that you will never feel guilty. Never
decide beforehand; you will never feel confused. Never decide beforehand and you will never feel
any conflict within you. So whatsoever you do, you do it totally; your act becomes total. And when
an act is total, it is beautiful. When an act is total, it gives you peace, silence, harmony.
So just go completely free of any plan and see what happens.
[A sannyasin said that she felt she loved Osho very much, but that she was also very much afraid of
him.]
(gently) That always happens with love, mm? If you love a person, you are afraid also. But that fear
is good – it is part of love. When fear is there and there is no love, it is a negative thing. When there
is love and fear, that creates one of the greatest values in life. That’s what we call respect.
When love is together with fear, in the alchemy of the mind, a new chemical arises. That is respect.
Love alone will not give you respect. You love a person – your lover, your friend – but there is no
fear; then there is no respect. You fear your enemy. but there is no love so there is no respect.
When you love a person and fear also arises, a totally new quality comes in – that’s what respect is.
[Osho went on to say that God is both a mystery and a terror; that you can love God but you have to
fear Him also. God creates both values in you – fear and love. This two-faceted aspect of God has
created a conflict for many people because they think that God is to be either feared or loved, but
that one cannot do both. Osho said that both attitudes miss.... ]
The very idea of God creates in you a new value not ordinarily known in life. You love Him, that’s
why you fear Him.
Why does fear arise when you love a person? – because you may not prove worthy. When you love
God, a fear arises that you may not prove worthy of him. You start trembling. You love Him, you
would like to prove worthy, but who knows? – you may not. You would like His love to shower on
you, but who knows whether you have earned it yet or not? Fear arises.
Love arises because of God – fear arises because of you. It is very natural – and good. Fear alone
is a disvalue. With love, the quality changes completely.
[A sannyasin says she feels sick and she did not know if it was physical or psychological. Osho said
that it was not a physical illness, but that she felt sick whenever she had to work, He said that she
